Title: Bypassing Minimization Bias: A Shift-Invariant Variance Estimator for Off-Equilibrium Local Learning Coefficients

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.22389v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 02:04:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
# Bypassing Minimization Bias: A Shift-Invariant Variance Estimator for Off-Equilibrium Local Learning Coefficients 

Yingjia Cai June, 2026 

Abstract 

Singular Learning Theory leverages the Local Learning Coefficient (LLC) to quantify the geometry of neural network loss landscapes. However, mean-energy LLC estimators depend explicitly on an additive loss baseline, typically an estimate of the local minimum. During transient, off-equilibrium training phases, this minimum is unknown; substituting it with the lowest noisy mini-batch loss induces a systematic minimization bias that distorts the geomet-ric measurement. In this paper, we propose the Shift-Invariant Variance Estimator (SIVE), a variance-based local LLC probe that structurally eliminates the unknown additive baseline through the variance operator. Combining this shift-invariant observable with an explicit cor-rection derived from the Law of Total Variance, SIVE separates geometric loss fluctuations from mini-batch evaluation noise. Controlled experiments on analytically tractable toy models show that SIVE recovers the expected finite-temperature geometric signal in regimes where anchored mean estimators fail. Applied to deep neural networks, SIVE provides a robust, localized online diagnostic for tracking structural phase transitions throughout training. 

# 1 Introduction 

The parameter space of deep neural networks forms a singular energy landscape characterized by extensive structural degeneracy. Singular Learning Theory (SLT) provides a rigorous mathematical framework to understand this complex geometry, leveraging the Local Learning Coefficient (LLC) to measure the effective degrees of freedom in specific local basins. However, a critical methodological gap prevents the LLC from being used as an online diagnostic tool during training. Current empirical LLC estimators require grounding the local energy function at the exact local minimum, L⋆. This poses a structural challenge for off-equilibrium, mid-training checkpoints where L⋆ remains inaccessible. In practice, substituting L⋆ with the minimum empirical loss observed over noisy mini-batches induces a minimization bias, artificially inflating the estimated energy gap and obscuring the underlying geometric measurement. Because a mid-training checkpoint is generally not an exact stationary point, deploying localized SGLD requires framing the measurement as an effective local diagnostic. By analyzing this localized tempered posterior through statistical mechanics, we show that the elusive L⋆ can be structurally eliminated by the variance operator. Furthermore, we derive an explicit dynamic noise-debiasing correction using the Law of Total Variance to isolate true geometric fluctuations from inherent evaluation noise. Our main contributions are: 1

> arXiv:2606.22389v1 [cs.LG] 21 Jun 2026

• The Shift-Invariant Variance Estimator (SIVE): We formulate LLC estimation as an off-equilibrium local probe that structurally bypasses minimization bias. By utilizing the variance operator and deriving an explicit mini-batch noise-debiasing correction via the Law of Total Variance, SIVE decouples geometric fluctuations from stochastic evaluation noise without requiring the unknown local minimum L⋆.• Controlled Validation and Scaling: We validate SIVE through controlled toy-model exper-iments where geometric invariants and error mechanisms are analytically known. Furthermore, we scale our probe to deep neural networks, demonstrating its ability to track structural phase transitions along the SGD trajectory. 

# 2 Background and Problem Formulation 

Standard statistical learning theory assumes regular models where the true parameter is unique and the loss landscape is locally convex. In contrast, deep neural networks are singular [7, 8]. Their loss landscapes contain degenerate valleys and overlapping parameter regions that encode the same functional mapping. Singular Learning Theory (SLT) quantifies this structural degeneracy using the Real Log Canonical Threshold (RLCT), or the Local Learning Coefficient (LLC), denoted by λ.Geometrically, the LLC acts as a measure of the effective degrees of freedom; a lower λ indicates a singular, degenerate region where the network has compressed its functional representation. Track-ing the LLC along the training trajectory has emerged as a promising lens for detecting structural phase transitions, such as grokking [6, 5] or the stagewise development of internal representations [8]. Neural network training via Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) operates as a non-equilibrium dynamical process [4, 1]. Rather than settling into a static point of zero gradient, the SGD tra-jectory is constantly in transit, navigating between competing solution basins and exploring finite-temperature Gibbs shells. This off-equilibrium nature presents a structural challenge for SLT diagnostics, which are formally formulated around exact minimizers. To evaluate the LLC computationally, the standard approach simulates a localized tempered posterior using Stochastic Gradient Langevin Dynamics (SGLD) [9, 3, 2]. For a local chart defined by an energy function K(θ) = L(θ)−L⋆ anchored at a local optimum L⋆, the leading-order statistical mechanical identity yields the mean-energy estimator: 

ˆλmean ≈ nβ Eq[K(θ)] = nβ Eq[L(θ) − L⋆], (1) where n is the dataset size, β is the inverse temperature, and q is the localized tempered posterior. While accurate at equilibrium, this mean-energy estimator encounters an operational challenge when deployed as a dynamic diagnostic tool mid-training. Because SGD operates out of equilibrium, the true infimum L⋆ of the transient basin remains inaccessible. To navigate this, empirical studies often adopt a retrospective anchoring approach—substituting L⋆ with a low-loss reference obtained after additional optimization or at the end of training [2]. This offline substitution is effective for post-hoc analysis, provided the loss landscape floor does not shift during the remaining training epochs. An alternative approach for online approximation is to set L⋆ to the lowest empirical loss ob-served during the localized SGLD chain ( ˆL⋆ = min m ˆL(θm)). From a statistical perspective, taking the minimum over stochastically evaluated mini-batches introduces a downward shift governed by extreme value statistics. As analyzed in the subsequent sections, this expected discrepancy induces a minimization bias that inflates the estimated energy gap. Addressing this baseline dependency is required to enable consistent, online off-equilibrium LLC tracking. 23 Method 

3.1 Trajectory-Conditioned Local Charts 

Let L(θ) denote the population loss, and let θtk be a checkpoint along the SGD trajectory. The checkpoint is not assumed to be a local minimizer; it only defines the center of a local chart. We localize the probe around θtk using a Gaussian reference density 

ϕk(θ) ∝ exp 

{

− ∥θ − θtk ∥2

2h2

}

. (2) Inside this chart, the unknown local basin floor is 

L⋆k = inf 

> θ∈Uk

L(θ), (3) where Uk denotes the effective support of the local chart. The corresponding local SLT energy is 

Kk(θ) = L(θ) − L⋆k. (4) Writing t = nβ for the inverse-temperature scale, the localized tempered posterior is 

qk,t (θ) ∝ exp {− tK k(θ)}ϕk(θ). (5) Operationally, the Gaussian reference acts as a tether: it keeps the SGLD probe near θtk while still allowing the loss gradient to explore lower-energy directions within the local basin. This confinement is essential in the off-equilibrium setting. Since a mid-training checkpoint generally satisfies ∇L(θtk )̸ = 0 , an unconstrained Langevin chain need not remain a local probe of that checkpoint; over long times or with an overly large localization radius, it can drift toward lower-loss regions and thereby confound the intended checkpoint-local measurement. Consequently, the off-equilibrium quantity estimated by SIVE represents an effective local LLC around the transient checkpoint θtk . The Gaussian reference acts as a necessary boundary to ensure the probe evaluates the geometry of the current local basin without escaping to disparate regions of the loss landscape. In the following, λk denotes this localized geometric signal at the chosen operating scale, extending the standard empirical SGLD measurement to off-equilibrium environments. 

3.2 The Double Cancellation of L⋆k

The primary obstacle in off-equilibrium LLC estimation is the inaccessibility of L⋆k. Our variance-based estimator bypasses this issue because L⋆k is mathematically eliminated in two distinct stages. First, L⋆k cancels from the sampling distribution. Substituting Kk(θ) = L(θ) − L⋆k into the localized posterior gives 

qk,t (θ) = exp {− t(L(θ) − L⋆k)}ϕk(θ)

∫ exp {− t(L(θ′) − L⋆k)}ϕk(θ′) dθ ′ = exp {− tL (θ)}ϕk(θ)

∫ exp {− tL (θ′)}ϕk(θ′) dθ ′ . (6) Therefore the localized SGLD chain can be run using the ordinary loss gradient; the absolute basin floor is unnecessary for sampling. Second, L⋆k cancels from the measurement. The free-energy identities reviewed in Appendix A.1 imply that, in the low-temperature SLT regime, the variance observable satisfies 

t2 Var qk,t [Kk(θ)] = λk + o(1) , t → ∞ . (7) 3The unknown shift is then removed exactly by the variance operator: 

Var qk,t [Kk(θ)] = Var qk,t [L(θ) − L⋆k] = Var qk,t [L(θ)] . (8) Consequently, L⋆k is structurally superfluous: it is required neither for sampling the localized poste-rior nor for computing the variance observable. This dual elimination is the mechanism by which the variance-based estimator circumvents the minimization bias inherent to mean-energy estimators. 

3.3 Mini-Batch Noise Debiasing 

While the theoretical variance elegantly removes L⋆k, empirical evaluation introduces a new chal-lenge. In our framework, we operationally decouple the SGLD parameter dynamics from the geo-metric measurements. Let Bgrad denote the mini-batch size used to compute stochastic gradients for the Langevin drift, and Beval denote the mini-batch size used to evaluate the loss at a given state. By the Law of Total Variance, the raw empirical variance over MCMC samples decomposes into the true geometric fluctuations and the inherent observation noise. For a single evaluation mini-batch of size Beval at state θm, we define the noisy observation as: 

ˆLm,i = L(θm) + εm,i , E[εm,i | θm] = 0 , Var( εm,i | θm) = σ2eval (θm, B eval ). (9) Thus, the joint variance over both the posterior q and the stochastic batch sampling B is: 

Var q, B[ ˆLm,i ] = Var q[L(θ)] + Eq[σ2eval (θ, B eval )] . (10) By drawing N conditionally independent evaluation mini-batches at the same state θm, we compute the empirical mean over the evaluation group: 

¯Lm = 1

N

> N

∑

> i=1

ˆLm,i . (11) Because the evaluations are conditionally independent given θm, the observation variance is reduced by a factor of N , yielding: 

Var q, B[ ¯Lm] = Var q[L(θ)] + Eq

[ σ2eval (θ, B eval )

N

]

. (12) Relying on the uncorrected empirical variance of ¯Lm would still scale the residual observation noise by (nβ )2, overshadowing the geometric signal λk. We debias this by computing the sample variance within each group to dynamically estimate the local noise profile: 

s2 

> m

= 1

N − 1

> N

∑

> i=1

( ˆLm,i − ¯Lm

)2

. (13) Since EB[s2 

> m

| θm] = σ2eval (θm, B eval ), subtracting this averaged noise profile directly isolates the pure geometric variance. The final debiased shift-invariant LLC estimator is: 

ˆλk = ( nβ )2

(

Var Mm=1 

[ ¯Lm

] − 1

M

> M

∑

> m=1

s2

> m

N

)

> +

, (14) 4Algorithm 1 SIVE: Shift-Invariant Variance Estimator for Off-Equilibrium LLCs  

> 1:

Input: Checkpoint θtk ; inverse-temperature parameters β, n ; localization radius h; SGLD step size η; SGLD steps M ; evaluation group size N ; evaluation mini-batch size Beval ; gradient mini-batch size Bgrad  

> 2:

Initialize θ(0) = θtk 

> 3:

for MCMC step m = 0 to M − 1 do  

> 4:

Draw N independent evaluation mini-batches Beval  

> m, 1

, . . . , Beval  

> m,N

, each of size Beval , and compute 

ˆLm,i = ˆLBeval  

> m,i

(θ(m)) 

> 5:

Compute ¯Lm = N −1 ∑Ni=1 ˆLm,i and s2 

> m

= ( N − 1) −1 ∑Ni=1 ( ˆLm,i − ¯Lm)2 

> 6:

Compute stochastic gradient gm = ∇ ˆL(θ(m)) using an independent mini-batch of size Bgrad  

> 7:

Sample ξm ∼ N (0 , I ) 

> 8:

Update θ(m+1) = θ(m) − ηnβg m − η θ(m)−θtk 

> h2

+ √2ηξ m 

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

Compute debiased ˆλk using Eq. (14) from { ¯Lm, s 2

> m

}M −1 

> m=0
> 11:

Output: SIVE estimate of the local learning coefficient ˆλk

where (·)+ acts as a safeguard against finite-sample negative estimates. This approach requires evaluating N independent mini-batches, each containing Beval samples, at every MCMC step. The parameter N therefore controls a direct tradeoff: larger evaluation groups reduce the residual noise correction error, at the cost of additional loss evaluations. The debiasing correction above acts on the observation layer: it removes the conditional variance introduced by stochastic loss evaluations given the visited SGLD states. It does not correct bias in the sampling distribution itself, such as finite-step discretization error or stochastic-gradient-induced perturbations of the Langevin drift. In the deep-learning experiments, we therefore in-terpret SIVE as a scalable fixed-step local probe rather than an asymptotically exact posterior sampler. 

# 4 Experiments 

We evaluate the proposed methodology in two stages: first, on analytically tractable toy models to strictly decouple the exact error mechanisms; second, by tracking the SGD trajectory of a deep neural network to demonstrate its practical utility in a realistic off-equilibrium setting. 

4.1 Controlled Validation on Toy Models 

4.1.1 Experimental Setup 

We consider two analytically tractable local energy models: Multiplicity m = 1 : K1(u) = u2, (15) Multiplicity m = 2 : K2(u, v ) = u2v2. (16) For both, min θ K(θ) = 0 . The observed empirical loss is deliberately shifted by a hidden constant basin floor L0 and corrupted by independent evaluation noise ϵ ∼ N (0 , σ 2):

ˆL(θ) = L0 + K(θ) + ϵ. (17) 5We write θ = u for K1 and θ = ( u, v ) for K2, and use K(θ) to denote either energy when no distinction is needed. This formulation cleanly decouples three components: the true geometric signal K(θ), the unknown basin floor L0 = L⋆, and the stochastic observation noise ϵ. Both models share an asymptotic continuous-time RLCT of λ = 1 /2, though the m = 2 singularity introduces finite-temperature corrections that shift the practical target below 1/2 at t = 10 4 (see Appendix A). We simulate localized SGLD with an inverse-temperature scale t = nβ = 10 4. To strictly isolate evaluation noise from dynamic optimization noise, SGLD transitions are driven by exact analytical gradients rather than stochastic mini-batches. At each sampled state θm, we draw N = 64 

independent noisy observations ˆLm,i to compute the group mean ¯Lm and within-group sample variance s2

> m

. The SGLD learning rate is parameterized as η = base_lr /t with base_lr = 0 .05 .Full parameter explorations are detailed in Appendix E.1. 

4.1.2 Estimator Configurations 

We compare four distinct estimator configurations to isolate the impacts of minimization bias and evaluation noise: i. Oracle Mean-based: Requires the exact analytical basin floor L⋆ = L0 and evaluates strictly on the noiseless loss contour. This privileged configuration is unavailable in realistic off-equilibrium settings but provides a ground-truth geometric reference. ii. Naive Mean-based: Does not require the true L⋆, instead substituting it with the empirical minimum along the noisy trajectory, ˆL⋆ = min m ˆL(θm). It processes noisy loss evaluations without any noise removal, representing the standard failure mode in deep learning practice. iii. Raw Variance-based: Bypasses L⋆ by applying the shift-invariant variance operator t2 Var[ ˆL]

directly to the noisy loss. While immune to minimization bias, it lacks a correction mechanism and remains vulnerable to mini-batch evaluation noise. iv. SIVE: bypasses the unknown L⋆ while actively correcting for stochasticity. It dynamically subtracts the averaged evaluation-noise profile (Eq. 14) from the noisy loss, isolating the pure geometric structural variance. 

4.1.3 Results and Analysis 

Table 1: LLC estimates on controlled noisy toy models. Estimator Configuration m = 1 : K(u) = u2 m = 2 : K(u, v ) = u2v2

Oracle Mean-based 0.5275 ± 0.0061 0.3980 ± 0.0424 

Naive Mean-based 11 .0155 ± 0.4489 10 .9775 ± 0.3132 

Raw Variance-based 6.8263 ± 0.0336 6.6818 ± 0.0919 

SIVE 0.5755 ± 0.0355 0.4310 ± 0.0961 

Table 1 reports the scaled LLC estimates averaged over five independent trials. While the asymptotic RLCT for both models is λ = 1 /2, the use of a finite inverse-temperature ( t = 10 4)and discrete Langevin steps mathematically shifts the expected operational baselines slightly. For the regular quadratic model, the finite-step ULA references are approximately 0.5263 for the mean-energy observable and 0.5540 for the variance observable. For the singular model, the leading 6finite-temperature references are approximately 0.391 for the mean-energy observable and 0.380 for the variance observable. These reference values are discussed in Appendix A and Appendix B. Evaluating against these baselines, the empirical failure modes are consistent with our theoret-ical error decomposition, fully exposing the vulnerabilities of uncorrected estimators: • Minimization Bias (Naive Mean): The naive mean estimator overestimates the geometric signal (yielding ≈ 11 .0). Because ˆL⋆ is the minimum over M noisy evaluations along the trajectory, negative order-statistics inherently drive ˆL⋆ below the true L⋆. Even a microscopic downward shift ∆ = L⋆ − ˆL⋆ ≈ 10 −3 induces an artificial error term t∆ ≈ 10 .0 at t = 10 4,which entirely dominates the geometric signal. • Noise Amplification (Raw Variance): By the Law of Total Variance, the raw estimator intrinsically absorbs the additive evaluation noise. Scaled by t2, the theoretical noise injection in our setting is t2σ2/N = 10 8 × (0 .002) 2/64 = 6 .25 . This explains why the uncorrected raw variance outputs ≈ 6.7.• Signal Recovery (SIVE): SIVE circumvents both failure mechanisms. Since s2 

> m

empirically estimates σ2, the averaged correction 1

> M

∑Mm=1 t2s2

> m

/N targets the same artifact t2σ2/N =6.25 . By dynamically subtracting this empirical correction, SIVE neutralizes the additive artifact and directly recovers geometric measurements ( 0.5755 and 0.4310 ) that align with the finite-temperature operational baselines, without ever estimating L⋆.A full derivation of the minimization-bias and noise-amplification mechanisms is provided in Ap-pendix C. 

4.2 Tracking SGD Dynamics in Deep Neural Networks 

4.2.1 Experimental Setup 

We train a standard 3-layer Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) with ReLU activations on the MNIST image classification dataset. The network is optimized using standard Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). To capture the full evolutionary trajectory of the model, we save checkpoints at continuous intervals across the training process. This includes the highly transient, off-equilibrium early epochs as well as the near-equilibrium state at convergence. At each checkpoint θtk , we initialize a localized SGLD chain using Algorithm 1 to measure the local learning coefficient. Implementation details will be discussed in Appendix F. 

4.2.2 Estimator Configurations 

Because the absolute true local minimum L⋆k of an overparameterized neural network is fundamen-tally unknown mid-training, the privileged Oracle estimator cannot be implemented. Instead, we compare three practical configurations to illustrate the impact of off-equilibrium dynamics: i. Online Naive Mean-based (Local ˆL⋆): Computes the energy gap using the lowest empirical loss encountered during the current localized SGLD chain .ii. Retrospective Mean-based (Final ˆL⋆): Represents a natural offline baseline that substi-tutes the unknown local minimum with the empirical minimum obtained at the end of training, after the network has converged. iii. SIVE: Evaluates the geometric signal dynamically using Eq. (14), structurally bypassing the need to anchor the energy function. 70.0            

> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> Loss
> Train Loss
> Test Loss
> 10 1
> 10 0
> Loss (log scale)
> Train Loss
> Test Loss
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Epoch
> 0
> 1000
> 2000
> 3000
> 4000
> LLC
> Online
> Retrospective
> SIVE
> 020 40 60 80 100
> Epoch
> 10 2
> 10 3
> LLC (log scale)
> Online
> Retrospective
> SIVE

Figure 1: Loss and LLC ( ˆλ) tracking during the SGD training trajectory. 

4.2.3 Results and Analysis 

To prevent sharp geometric transitions from being visually obscured by trajectory misalignment across training runs, Figure 1 plots a single representative SGD trajectory focusing strictly on the optimization dynamics (Epochs 1 to 100). The unoptimized random initialization state (Epoch 0) is deferred to Appendix G as a numerical reference. At each evaluated checkpoint, the reported estimates are averaged over five independent localized SGLD trials. 

The Artificial Inflation of Retrospective Anchoring. The Retrospective Mean-based es-timator, representing the standard offline proxy in current SLT literature, exhibits substantial artificial inflation during the early and mid-training phases. At Epoch 1, it reports a systemati-cally inflated ˆλ ≈ 4305 , which monotonically decays to ≈ 98 by Epoch 100. By rigidly anchoring the transient energy function to the final converged loss L⋆

> final

, this estimator fundamentally conflates the macroscopic optimization descent distance with local geometric complexity. The transient loss gap acts as a dominant noise term, forcing the estimator to strictly mirror the macroscopic training loss curve and masking any underlying structural phase transitions. 

The Structural Collapse of Online Anchoring. Conversely, the Online Naive Mean-based estimator attempts to dynamically anchor the energy to the minimum empirical loss encountered within the current localized SGLD chain. Under the aligned localization setting, this estimator experiences structural compression throughout the trajectory, predominantly fluctuating within a narrow band (e.g., between ≈ 100 and ≈ 240 ) before converging to ≈ 98 at Epoch 100. As mapped in Appendix C.3, this severe initial underestimation is characteristic of the high-dimensional floor-miss regime. Because the localized SGLD chain explores a thermal shell suspended significantly above the true local basin floor on steep early-training slopes, substituting L⋆k with an elevated empirical minimum structurally subtracts the geometric energy gap ( −tg M ). Consequently, the anchored estimate measures the localized thickness of the thermal shell rather than providing a dynamic geometric signal. 8SIVE Captures Non-Monotonic Structural Transitions Associated with Memorization 

SIVE decouples the geometric measurement from these anchoring artifacts. By operating exclu-sively on energy fluctuations, the variance operator eliminates the unknown baseline, enabling SIVE to capture the true, non-monotonic structural evolution of the loss landscape. During the early optimization transient (Epoch 1), SIVE records an elevated geometric com-plexity of ˆλ ≈ 1410 . As the network learns generalized representations, the trajectory descends into a highly degenerate valley, reaching a broad minimum of ˆλ ≈ 175 during the mid-training phase. Crucially, as training enters the post-saturation regime—where the training loss continues to decay but the test loss plateaus—SIVE isolates a distinct, late-stage rebound in local geometric complexity, stabilizing at ≈ 229 near Epoch 100. This post-saturation rise provides strong empir-ical evidence for SLT predictions regarding memorization: as the network begins to overfit label noise, it is forced to break internal symmetries, constraining more parameters and shifting into sharper, less degenerate (higher LLC) geometric regions. SIVE is uniquely capable of decoupling this local geometric inflation from the macroscopic loss descent. 

# 5 Conclusion and Future Work 

We presented a shift-invariant methodology for tracking the Local Learning Coefficient (LLC) during the transient phases of neural network training. By treating mid-training checkpoints as centers for local charts rather than assumed equilibria, we identified the susceptibility of mean-based estimators to minimization bias. Utilizing the variance operator alongside an empirical noise correction, SIVE achieves a double cancellation of the unknown local minimum. The resulting estimator decouples mini-batch evaluation noise from the underlying geometric fluctuation scale. The precision of the debiasing operation is governed by a computational tradeoff: it requires a sufficiently large independent evaluation group size ( N ) per step to bound the variance of the evaluation noise. Given an appropriate evaluation budget, SIVE transforms the LLC from a static, end-of-training metric into a dynamic diagnostic for deep learning trajectories. Historically, Singular Learning Theory has served primarily as a retrospective framework due to the computational difficulty of measuring the LLC off-equilibrium. By providing a tractable online estimator, this work makes it feasible to incorporate the LLC directly into the training ob-jective. Similar to how Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) penalizes local curvature, employing a variance-based LLC probe as a dynamic regularizer could steer Stochastic Gradient Descent to-wards degenerate, structurally favorable regions of the loss landscape. We leave the development of such geometrically guided optimizers for future investigation. 

Code Availability. Code for reproducing the controlled toy-model experiments, hyperparameter sensitivity analyses, and neural-network SIVE diagnostics is available at: https://github.com/ yingjiacai/SIVE .

# References 

[1] Pratik Chaudhari and Stefano Soatto. Stochastic gradient descent performs variational infer-ence, converges to limit cycles for deep networks. In 2018 Information Theory and Applications Workshop , pages 1–10. IEEE, 2018. [2] Zach Furman and Edmund Lau. Estimating the local learning coefficient at scale, 2024. 9[3] Edmund Lau, Zach Furman, George Wang, Daniel Murfet, and Susan Wei. The local learning coefficient: A singularity-aware complexity measure, 2023. [4] Stephan Mandt, Matthew D. Hoffman, and David M. Blei. Stochastic gradient descent as approximate bayesian inference. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 18(134):1–35, 2017. [5] Neel Nanda, Lawrence Chan, Tom Lieberum, Jess Smith, and Jacob Steinhardt. Progress measures for grokking via mechanistic interpretability, 2023. [6] Alethea Power, Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Igor Babuschkin, and Vedant Misra. Grokking: Generalization beyond overfitting on small algorithmic datasets, 2022. [7] Sumio Watanabe. Algebraic Geometry and Statistical Learning Theory . Cambridge University Press, 2009. [8] Susan Wei, Daniel Murfet, Mingming Gong, Hui Li, Jesse Gell-Redman, and Thomas Quella. Deep learning is singular, and that’s good. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , 34(12), 2023. [9] Max Welling and Yee Whye Teh. Bayesian learning via stochastic gradient langevin dynamics. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 681–688, 2011. 10 A Free-Energy Identities and Finite-Temperature Reference Val-ues 

This appendix establishes the statistical-mechanical identities that serve as the theoretical foun-dation for both the standard mean-energy LLC estimator and our proposed variance-based LLC estimator. Furthermore, it derives the specific finite-temperature reference values required to ac-curately interpret the empirical results of the controlled singular toy-model experiments. 

A.1 Free-Energy Identities 

Let K(θ) ≥ 0 define a local energy function (typically the loss gap L(θ) − L⋆), and let ϕ(θ) dθ 

denote a localized reference measure. For a given inverse-temperature scale t = nβ , the localized partition function is defined as: 

Z(t) = 

∫

exp {− tK (θ)}ϕ(θ) dθ, (18) and the corresponding free energy is: 

F (t) = − log Z(t). (19) The associated localized tempered posterior is: 

qt(θ) = exp {− tK (θ)}ϕ(θ)

Z(t) . (20) According to the standard asymptotic expansion in Singular Learning Theory (SLT), as t → ∞ ,the local Laplace integral is dominated by the most singular region of the parameter space: 

Z(t) ≍ C t −λ(log t)m−1, (21) where λ is the Real Log Canonical Threshold (RLCT) and m is the multiplicity of the singularity. Equivalently, the leading-order free energy is: 

Flead (t) = λ log t − (m − 1) log log t. (22) By standard statistical-mechanical identities, the posterior mean and variance of the local energy correspond exactly to the first and second derivatives of the free energy with respect to the inverse temperature: 

Eqt [K(θ)] = F ′(t), Var qt [K(θ)] = −F ′′ (t). (23) This mathematically establishes that the standard anchored mean-energy estimator and our variance-based estimator are not disparate heuristic metrics; rather, they are distinct geometric observables derived from the exact same localized thermodynamic system. 

A.2 Finite-Temperature Reference for the Mean-Energy Observable 

For empirical evaluations using MCMC, simulations are necessarily conducted at a finite inverse-temperature scale (in our settings, t = 10 4). Because the logarithmic convergence to the asymptotic limit is exceedingly slow, the proper empirical benchmark is not the exact asymptotic RLCT, but rather the finite-temperature thermodynamic target. 11 Differentiating the leading free energy once provides the formal finite-temperature reference for the mean-energy observable: 

t Eqt [K(θ)] ≈ λ − m − 1log t . (24) For the singular toy model K2(u, v ) = u2v2 analyzed in Section 4.1, the exact asymptotic geometric invariants are λ = 1 /2 and m = 2 . Substituting these alongside t = 10 4 yields: 

t Eqt [K(θ)] ≈ 12 − 1log(10 4) . (25) Given log(10 4) ≈ 9.2103 , the formal target evaluates to: 

12 − 19.2103 ≈ 0.5 − 0.1086 ≈ 0.391 . (26) This value ( 0.391 ) serves as the precise finite-temperature reference for the privileged Oracle Mean-based estimator in the m = 2 toy model experiments. 

A.3 Finite-Temperature Reference for the Variance Observable 

Differentiating the leading free energy a second time yields the corresponding finite-temperature reference for the variance observable: 

t2 Var qt [K(θ)] = −t2F ′′ (t) ≈ λ − m − 1log t − m − 1(log t)2 . (27) Substituting λ = 1 /2, m = 2 , and t = 10 4 gives: 

t2 Var qt [K(θ)] ≈ 12 − 19.2103 − 1(9 .2103) 2 . (28) Numerically, this translates to: 

t2 Var qt [K(θ)] ≈ 0.5 − 0.1086 − 0.0118 ≈ 0.380 . (29) This calculation demonstrates that for the multiplicity-2 singularity at practical temperature scales, the variance observable mathematically anchors slightly below the mean-energy observable. Crucially, the variance operator structurally decouples this geometric measurement from the local minimum L⋆. Because K(θ) = L(θ) − L⋆ and L⋆ is a constant with respect to the parameter space, the variance strictly isolates the geometric fluctuations: 

Var qt [K(θ)] = Var qt [L(θ) − L⋆] = Var qt [L(θ)] . (30) Consequently, substituting K(θ) with the pure empirical loss L(θ) in the variance observable yields an identical theoretical target ( ≈ 0.380 ) without ever requiring the explicit calculation or estimation of the inaccessible local floor L⋆.

# B Finite-Step ULA Bias and the Moment-Closure Barrier 

The continuous-time reference values derived in Appendix A formally assume exact sampling from the target thermodynamic posterior. In practice, however, empirical LLC diagnostics are driven by the discrete-time Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (ULA). This appendix demonstrates how finite step sizes alter the stationary distribution, injecting a systematic discretization bias. We first separate the mathematically tractable regular case—where exact moment calculations are explicitly solvable—from the singular case, where structural non-linearities obstruct closed-form solutions. 12 B.1 Finite-Step Bias in Regular Quadratic Geometries 

To isolate the precise mechanics of ULA discretization bias, we analyze the strictly regular quadratic toy model, K1(u) = u2. Because the gradient is linear ( ∇K1 = 2 u), the infinite hierarchy of moments collapses into a solvable algebraic system. Let the dimensionless effective step size be denoted by a = ηt = base_lr . Disregarding the macroscopic localization prior for local analytic clarity, the discrete ULA update forms a stable, linear AR(1) process: 

um+1 = um − ηt (2 um) + √2η ξ m = (1 − 2a)um +

√ 2at ξm, ξm ∼ N (0 , 1) . (31) Taking the variance at stationarity (where Var ULA (um+1 ) = Var ULA (um)) yields a closed scalar equation: 

Var ULA (u) = (1 − 2a)2 Var ULA (u) + 2at =⇒ Var ULA (u) = 2a/t 

1 − (1 − 2a)2 = 12t(1 − a) . (32) Because the stationary distribution of this linear process remains strictly Gaussian with zero mean, we can analytically compute the exact discrete-time targets for both the mean-energy and variance-based geometric observables: 

t EULA [u2] = 12(1 − a) , t2 Var ULA (u2) = 12(1 − a)2 . (33) In the exact continuous-time limit ( a → 0), these formulations recover the theoretical baseline (1/2). However, for any finite step size a > 0, the discrete Markov chain inherently overshoots, systematically inflating both observables. Table 2 compares empirical measurements against these exact ULA targets for the regular K1

model. We intentionally evaluate a relatively large step size ( a = 0 .10 ) to amplify the discretization artifact. Table 2: Finite-step calibration on the regular quadratic toy model K1(u) = u2 at t = 10 4. The empirical estimates strictly conform to the exact ULA discrete-time formulas, confirming that the observed upward shifts are structural algorithmic artifacts of discrete Langevin dynamics rather than estimation errors. 

base_lr = a Oracle Mean Exact Target SIVE Exact Target 

0.05 0.5275 ± 0.0061 0.5263 0.5755 ± 0.0355 0.5540 0.10 0.5549 ± 0.0040 0.5555 0.6307 ± 0.0285 0.6173 

The quantitative agreement confirms the statistical soundness of the proposed debiased variance estimator: it faithfully measures the true underlying distribution of the discrete samples, even when that distribution is structurally widened by finite-step Langevin dynamics. 

B.2 The Moment-Closure Barrier in Singular Geometries 

For singular geometries, calculating an exact discrete-time target analogous to the one above is obstructed by the Moment Closure Problem. Consider the pure SGLD update for the singular toy model K2(u, v ) = u2v2, driven by the non-linear gradient component ∇uK2 = 2 uv 2:

um+1 = um − ηt (2 umv2

> m

) + √2ηξ m. (34) 13 Squaring both sides and taking the expectation at stationarity ( E[u2

> m+1

] = E[u2

> m

]) eliminates the 

u2 

> m

terms. Since ξm is zero-mean and independent of the state, we obtain: 

0 = −4ηt E[u2v2] + 4 η2t2E[u2v4] + 2 η. (35) Dividing by 4η and rearranging yields the stationary relationship for the target geometric observable 

K2 = u2v2:

tE[u2v2] = 12 + ( ηt ) tE[u2v4]. (36) In the continuous-time limit ( ηt → 0), the higher-order error term vanishes, recovering the asymptotic RLCT limit 1/2. Yet, at any practical finite step size ηt = a > 0, the expected value of the target observable E[u2v2] remains explicitly coupled to a higher-order moment, E[u2v4]. Solving for E[u2v4] recursively necessitates E[u2v6], leading to an infinite hierarchy of unclosed moments generated by the singular drift. Consequently, formulating a closed-form algebraic target for finite-step ULA bias in m ≥ 2

singularities is mathematically intractable. This structural barrier necessitates the use of controlled empirical ablations—detailed subsequently in Appendix E—to identify a stable thermodynamic operating point ( base_lr = 0 .05 ) that minimizes artifactual inflation while maintaining sufficient mixing. 

# C Theoretical Failure Modes of Anchored Mean Estimators and the Unified Bias Law 

This appendix formalizes the structural mechanisms that cause traditional, anchored mean-energy LLC estimators to fail in practical off-equilibrium settings. By deriving a unified error decom-position, we demonstrate how the same empirical anchoring procedure induces an upward bias in low-dimensional noisy toy models, yet forces a systematic downward bias in high-dimensional neural networks. 

C.1 General Error Decomposition 

Let θtk represent a mid-training checkpoint defining the center of a local chart. Because practical deep learning models do not reach mathematical equilibrium mid-training, the localized empirical grouped loss observed at MCMC step m can be decomposed as: 

¯Lm = L⋆k + Km + ¯ εm, (37) where L⋆k = inf θ∈Uk L(θ) is the inaccessible absolute local basin floor, Km = L(θm) − L⋆k ≥ 0 is the true underlying geometric energy, and ¯εm is the centered grouped observation noise. A standard online mean-based estimator attempts to bypass the unknown L⋆k by substituting it with the minimum empirical loss encountered along the localized trajectory, ˆL⋆ = min 1≤m≤M ¯Lm.This empirical minimum systematically deviates from the true floor: 

min 

> 1≤m≤M

¯Lm = L⋆k + gM − νM , (38) where gM = min m Km ≥ 0 represents the absolute optimization gap (the lowest physical energy reached by the chain), and νM ≥ 0 denotes the downward shift driven by the order statistics of the stochastic evaluation noise. 14 Substituting this empirical baseline into the mean-energy estimator at inverse-temperature t =

nβ yields the Unified Bias Law for online anchored estimators: 

ˆλonline = t

(

1

M

> M

∑

> m=1

¯Lm − min 

> 1≤m≤M

¯Lm

)

= t

(

1

M

> M

∑

> m=1

Km

)

− tg M + tν M + t

(

1

M

> M

∑

> m=1

¯εm

)

. (39) Assuming a properly mixed post-burn-in chain where the average noise vanishes ( 1

> M

∑ ¯εm → 0), and invoking the standard SLT mean-energy identity t E[Km] ≈ λk, the leading-order observable simplifies to: ˆλonline ≈ λk − tg M + tν M . (40) Equation (40) dictates that the estimation error is strictly governed by the competition between the floor-miss geometric penalty ( −tg M ) and the order-statistics noise inflation ( +tν M ). 

C.2 Noise-Dominated Regime: Low-Dimensional Toy Models 

In analytically tractable, low-dimensional toy models, the localized MCMC chain mixes rapidly and repeatedly reaches states arbitrarily close to the exact minimum. Consequently, the geometric optimization gap vanishes ( gM ≈ 0), isolating the estimator in a noise-dominated regime: 

ˆλonline ≈ λk + tν M . (41) Under an additive evaluation-noise model where independent observations carry variance σ2, the group mean over N evaluations retains a residual variance of σ2/N . Standard extreme-value theory for Gaussian sequences predicts that the expected downward order-statistics dip scales as: 

E[νM ] ≈ σ

√N cM , cM ≈ √2 log Meff , (42) where Meff is the number of effectively independent samples. For our controlled setup ( t = 10 4, σ =0.002 , N = 64 ), utilizing the post-burn-in proxy Meff ≈ 7 × 10 4 yields cM ≈ 4.72 . The expected artifact scales to: 

t E[νM ] ≈ 10 4 ×

( 0.002 8

)

× 4.72 ≈ 11 .8. (43) This theoretical magnitude maps precisely to the empirical inflation observed in Table 1, where taking the minimum over noisy evaluations forces the naive mean estimate up to ≈ 11 .0, entirely obscuring the underlying geometric signal ( ≈ 0.4). 

C.3 Floor-Miss Regime: High-Dimensional Neural Networks 

When scaling to overparameterized neural networks, the statistical mechanics of the localized probe undergo a structural inversion. Driven by complex off-equilibrium gradients and high-dimensional parameter spaces, the localized tempered posterior concentrates its probability mass on a finite-temperature Gibbs shell suspended significantly above the true local basin floor. Because the localized chain never descends to the exact minimum, the gap gM becomes strictly positive and substantial ( gM ≫ 0). The evaluation noise contribution νM becomes subdominant relative to this macroscopic geometric suspension. The bias law is thus governed by the floor-miss penalty: ˆλonline ≈ λk − tg M . (44) 15 This explains the systematic underestimation reported in the DNN experiments (Section 4.2). When anchored to the elevated empirical minimum, the estimator structurally subtracts the spatial depth of the localized basin. Rather than measuring the global geometric complexity (the extensive degrees of freedom), the anchored mean estimator is reduced to measuring the localized thickness of the sampled thermal shell. 

C.4 Structural Capabilities and Limitations of the Variance Operator 

The failure modes described above confirm that a shift-invariant formulation is a structural require-ment for off-equilibrium probes. It is crucial, however, to delineate the exact boundaries of what the proposed Shift-Invariant Variance Estimator (SIVE) achieves and what it leaves unaddressed. • Elimination of Anchoring Bias: By operating exclusively on energy fluctuations ( Var[ L(θ)−

L⋆] = Var[ L(θ)] ), SIVE mathematically annihilates the unknown additive baseline L⋆k. This eliminates both the floor-miss penalty ( −tg M ) and the order-statistics noise inflation ( +tν M ), bypassing the Unified Bias Law. • Elimination of Observation Noise: Through the empirical correction term derived via the Law of Total Variance (Eq. 14), SIVE dynamically subtracts the variance injected by conditionally independent mini-batch loss evaluations. • Unaddressed Distributional Errors: SIVE acts strictly on the observation layer; it does not correct biases intrinsic to the localized sampling distribution. It does not mitigate the finite-step ULA discretization bias (Appendix B), finite-chain Monte Carlo variance, structural dependencies on the choice of the localization radius, or stochastic-gradient-induced perturba-tions in the Langevin drift. The behavior of the shift-invariant measurement under the remaining structural dependencies— specifically the localization radius h and the chain length M —is formally analyzed in the following appendix. 

# D Localization Radius, Chain Length, and Tail-Window Consis-tency 

While the variance operator structurally eliminates the absolute baseline L⋆k, the localized SGLD probe remains dependent on the physical boundaries of the local chart (dictated by the localization radius h) and the convergence properties of the Markov chain (dictated by the total steps M ). This appendix formalizes how the localized posterior interacts with off-equilibrium gradients and establishes the operational rules for configuring the probe. 

D.1 A Local Gaussian Tether Model on a Non-Equilibrium Slope 

In practical deep learning, stochastic gradient descent operates as a non-equilibrium process; mid-training checkpoints θtk are rarely true stationary points ( ∇L̸ = 0 ). Consequently, localized MCMC chains explore gradient “slopes” rather than symmetric minima. To model this analytically, we approximate the local singular energy by a surrogate that ex-plicitly retains the non-vanishing linear drift: 

Kk(θ) ≈ g⊤ 

> k

x + 12 x⊤Hkx, x = θ − θtk , (45) 16 where gk = ∇L(θtk )̸ = 0 is the residual gradient and Hk is the local Hessian. This residual gradient 

gk is the exact physical mechanism responsible for the macroscopic floor-miss gap gM formalized in Appendix C.3; it actively drives the finite-temperature chain down the slope, suspending the empirical trajectory significantly above the absolute basin floor. Under the Gaussian prior exp {−∥ x∥2/(2 h2)}, the tethered local Gibbs law becomes: 

qk,t,h (x) ∝ exp 

{

−t

(

g⊤ 

> k

x + 12 x⊤Hkx

)

− 12h2 ∥x∥2

}

. (46) The restoring force of the prior ensures the posterior remains a multivariate Gaussian N (μk,h , Σk,h ),but its equilibrium center is forcibly shifted down the linear slope: 

Σk,h = ( tH k + h−2I)−1, μk,h = −tΣk,h gk. (47) 

D.2 Mean Failure and Variance Plateau on a Slope 

The following proposition establishes how the mean and variance observables react to this off-equilibrium displacement μk,h .

Proposition 1 (Mean Failure vs. Variance Plateau on a Slope) . Assume the gradient-drift surro-gate. Let λi be the eigenvalues of Hk. For small localization radii where the prior dominates the local curvature ( h ≪ (tλ max )−1/2), the equilibrium center shifts down the linear slope by μk,h ≈ − th 2gk.The mean-energy observable is entirely dominated by an artificial, h-dependent drop: 

t Eqk,t,h [Kk] ≈ − t2h2∥gk∥2. (48) 

Conversely, the variance observable structurally annihilates this first-order displacement μk,h :

t2 Var qk,t,h [Kk] = 12 tr ((tH kΣk,h )2) + (tg ⊤ 

> k

Σk,h tH kΣk,h tg k

). (49) 

In low-curvature singular valleys ( λi → 0), the trace term survives while the gradient-coupled artifact vanishes, establishing an h-independent topological plateau for the variance operator. Proof. By standard Gaussian integration, the expected observable under N (μk,h , Σk,h ) evaluates to: 

E[Kk] = g⊤ 

> k

μk,h + 12 μ⊤

> k,h

Hkμk,h + 12 tr( HkΣk,h ). (50) For a tight tether ( h → 0), the prior dominates the Hessian ( h−2I ≫ tH k), yielding Σk,h ≈ h2I and 

μk,h ≈ − th 2gk. The linear term dictates the descent: g⊤ 

> k

(−th 2gk) = −th 2∥gk∥2. This macroscopic drop overwhelms the smaller O(h2) trace term, confirming the tether-dependent underestimation. For the variance observable, the variance of the quadratic form g⊤ 

> k

x + 12 x⊤Hkx under a shifted Gaussian depends on third and fourth moments. Standard cumulant expansions yield: 

Var( Kk) = 12 tr ((HkΣk,h )2) + ( gk + Hkμk,h )⊤Σk,h (gk + Hkμk,h ). (51) Substituting μk,h = −tΣk,h gk, the shifted gradient evaluates to gk − tH kΣk,h gk. Scaling the entire variance by t2 recovers the stated proposition. In directions where curvature is negligible ( Hk ≈ 0), this gradient-coupled variance term shrinks, leaving only the structural trace. Proposition 1 formally confirms the empirical friction observed in off-equilibrium environments. Conceptually, a mean-based estimator acts analogously to a sounding line dropped onto a gradient slope: the measured “depth” is purely a function of the tether length h2. Shrinking h proportionally collapses the measurement, resulting in artificial underestimations. The variance operator acts as a shock-absorber, stripping away the absolute translation μk,h and isolating the geometric fluctuation scale. 17 D.3 Finite Chain Length and Tail Windows 

The second critical dependency is the Markov chain length M . Let Fm be an observable evaluated along the SGLD chain (e.g., Fm = ¯Lm). The observable sequence can be decomposed as: 

Fm = μ∞ + δm + ηm, (52) where μ∞ is the true stationary mean, ηm is a centered stationary fluctuation, and δm is a transient drift term satisfying δm → 0 as m → ∞ .To mitigate the transient drift, we define a tail window that discards the initial burn-in phase: 

Wα = {⌊ αM ⌋, . . . , M − 1}, 0 < α < 1, (53) and compute the empirical average: ̂

μWα = 1

|W α|

∑

> m∈W α

Fm. (54) 

Proposition 2 (Finite-chain consistency) . Assume the post-burn-in chain is geometrically mixing with an integrated autocorrelation time τint (F ), and suppose the transient drift decays as |δm| ≤ Cρ m

for some 0 < ρ < 1. Then the bias and variance of the tail-window estimator satisfy: 

E[̂ μWα

] = μ∞ + O(ραM ), (55) 

Var (̂ μWα

) = O

( 1

|W α|eff 

)

, |W α|eff ≍ (1 − α)Mτint (F ) . (56) 

Proof. The bias bound follows directly from summing the geometric tail of δm over the interval Wα.The variance bound corresponds to the standard effective-sample-size estimate for geometrically mixing Markov chains. Since |W α| = (1 − α)M + O(1) , the residual Monte Carlo error decays as 

O(M −1/2eff ) across a stationary tail window. 

D.4 Combined Error Law for the Tail-Window LLC Probe 

By combining the structural dependencies on h and M , we can formulate the comprehensive oper-ational error decomposition for the debiased variance estimator computed over a tail window: ̂

λtail = λplateau  

> k

+ O(h−2) + O(ραM ) + Op

(

|W α|−1/2eff 

)

, (57) where λplateau  

> k

denotes the topology-dependent fluctuation scale established in Proposition 1. This decomposition strictly separates three distinct operational effects: • Small-h Underexploration [ O(h−2)]: If h is too small, the chart is over-constrained, artifi-cially compressing the geometric observable. • Finite-M Nonstationarity [ O(ραM )]: If the total chain length M or the burn-in ratio α is insufficient, transient optimization drift contaminates the stationary variance. • Tail-Window Monte Carlo Error [ Op(|W α|−1/2eff )]: Once the chain achieves stationarity, the inherent sampling error decays smoothly according to the effective sample size. 18 D.5 Operational Consequence 

The mathematical analysis above yields a straightforward operational doctrine for deploying local-ized SGLD probes: the localization radius h operates as a saturation knob , while the chain length 

M operates as a consistency knob .The value of h must be set large enough to cross the O(h−2) penalty threshold and enter the robust geometric plateau, where further expansion induces only negligible higher-order corrections. Concurrently, M must be sufficiently extensive to guarantee that the tail window encompasses a statistically independent, stationary sequence. The corresponding empirical sweeps validating these theoretical predictions are detailed in the subsequent appendix. 

# E Hyperparameter Operating Point and Sensitivity Analysis 

This appendix empirically validates the theoretical constraints established in Appendices B and D. By systematically sweeping the structural parameters of the localized SGLD probe, we isolate their individual physical mechanisms and establish a robust, objective operational configuration for deployment in deep neural networks. 

E.1 Stable Operating Point and Diagnostic Protocol 

To prevent confounded measurements, we anchor the diagnostics around an empirically established stable operating baseline. By freezing the system at this baseline, we sweep one structural parameter at a time across a wide numerical range, while holding the remaining parameters fixed. This protocol isolates the physical role of each component of the localized SGLD probe. Unless otherwise specified, the controlled diagnostics are executed on the singular toy model 

K2(u, v ) = u2v2 with a hidden basin floor L0 = 100 and independent Gaussian evaluation noise 

σ = 0 .002 . The generic thermodynamic parameters follow standard empirical SLT configurations: inverse-temperature scale t = nβ = 10 4, total SGLD steps M = 100 ,000 , and burn-in ratio α = 0 .3.Table 3 summarizes the stable operating point used throughout the toy-model diagnostics, together with the corresponding deep-learning batch-allocation parameters. The toy diagnostics use N = 64 as the default evaluation-group size in order to expose the statistical mechanics of the debiasing correction under controlled noise. In the neural-network experiments, we increase the evaluation group to N = 512 using vectorized forward passes, as described in Appendix F.3, to further suppress the residual uncertainty of the noise correction. These values represent an operational balance among geometric fidelity, thermodynamic mixing, and computational precision. The subsequent sweeps perturb h, base_lr , and N around this baseline to expose their individual failure modes and stability plateaus. 

E.2 Localization Sensitivity to h

The localization radius h should not be interpreted as a purely numerical hyperparameter. In the off-equilibrium setting, it defines the spatial scale of the local chart. If h is too small, the chain cannot access the relevant singular directions, and the resulting estimate reflects the Gaussian tether rather than the loss geometry. If h is too large, the nonzero gradient at the checkpoint can dominate the local dynamics and drive the chain toward lower-loss regions outside the intended observation window. Stable LLC tracking, therefore, requires an intermediate regime in which the chart is large enough to contain the relevant local geometry but small enough to preserve checkpoint locality. 19 Table 3: Default hyperparameters and operating configuration. Unless otherwise stated, these values are held fixed when sweeping a single structural parameter. Category Quantity Value Toy model Localization and N diagnostics K2(u, v ) = u2v2

Toy model Finite-step calibration K1(u) = u2 and K2(u, v ) = u2v2

Toy model Hidden basin floor L0 100 

Toy model Evaluation noise standard deviation σ 0.002 

Common Inverse-temperature scale t = nβ 10 ,000 

Common Total SGLD steps M 100 ,000 

Common Burn-in ratio α 0.3

Common Independent MCMC trials 5

Default toy setting Localization radius h 2.0

Default toy setting Base step size base_lr 0.05 

Default toy setting Evaluation group size N 64 

DNN setting Adaptive localization base radius h 1.0

DNN setting Base step size base_lr 0.05 

DNN setting Evaluation group size N 512 

DNN setting Evaluation mini-batch size Beval 64 

DNN setting Gradient mini-batch size Bgrad 1024 

Having fixed the baseline configuration in Table 3, we first vary the localization radius h.Appendix D theoretically posits that h functions as a saturation knob: once the chart is large enough to contain the relevant local geometry, further increases should induce only higher-order corrections. Table 4 reports the empirical estimates across a wide spectrum of h.Table 4: Localization sensitivity to h on the singular toy model K2(u, v ) = u2v2.

h Oracle Mean-based SIVE 

0.05 1.7305 ± 0.1120 1.7330 ± 0.1469 0.10 0.4942 ± 0.0857 0.5077 ± 0.1172 0.20 0.3264 ± 0.1011 0.3376 ± 0.1462 0.50 0.3763 ± 0.0760 0.4264 ± 0.0969 1.00 0.3866 ± 0.0576 0.4427 ± 0.0957 2.00 0.3970 ± 0.0698 0.4547 ± 0.1040 5.00 0.3944 ± 0.0665 0.4551 ± 0.1043 10 .00 0.3938 ± 0.0657 0.4549 ± 0.1041 20 .00 0.3938 ± 0.0658 0.4550 ± 0.1042 50 .00 0.3938 ± 0.0658 0.4550 ± 0.1042 

The empirical behavior strongly corroborates the theoretical predictions, separating into two distinct geometric regimes: • The Underexploration Penalty ( h ≤ 0.5): When the chart is overly constrained, the Gaussian prior artificially dominates the local geometry. At h = 0 .05 , the probe is trapped on a steep slope, resulting in severe discretization stiffness and inflated estimates ( ≈ 1.73 ). At 

h = 0 .2, the geometric squeezing causes a structural collapse of the measurement ( ≈ 0.32 ), 20 reflecting the O(h−2) penalty derived in Proposition 1. • The Onset of the Stability Plateau ( h ≥ 1.0): Once h safely encompasses the effective volume of the singularity, the estimator enters a robust plateau. At h = 1 .0, the measurement reaches 0.4427 ± 0.0957 , which is statistically indistinguishable from the asymptotic plateau value of ≈ 0.455 maintained up to h = 50 .0. This invariance confirms that the variance operator isolates energy fluctuations, rendering the measurement structurally robust to the spatial bounds once this critical threshold is crossed. 

Operational Translation for DNNs. While unbounded radii ( h ≫ 2.0) are benign in isolated, single-basin toy models, overparameterized neural networks possess highly non-convex landscapes populated with closely packed, degenerate valleys. In such off-equilibrium environments, an ex-cessively loose Gaussian tether risks allowing the localized SGLD chain to escape across saddle points into adjacent functional basins, violating the core assumption of a checkpoint-local diagnos-tic. Consequently, we deploy h = 1 .0 as the adaptive localization base radius in our deep learning experiments (Section 4.2). This configuration serves as an operational balance: it is the tightest tether that successfully bypasses the O(h−2) underexploration penalty while providing maximal confinement against unintended cross-basin drift. 

E.3 Finite-Step Calibration of base_lr 

Because the Moment-Closure barrier (Appendix B.2) prevents calculating the exact Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (ULA) target for singular geometries, we empirically ablate the dimensionless base step size ( base_lr = ηt ). We identify the optimal operating point by tracking the cross-trial standard deviation of the privileged Oracle Mean estimator, which serves as a rigorous proxy for thermodynamic mixing stability. Table 5: Finite-step calibration on the singular toy model K2(u, v ) = u2v2. The operational sweet spot is objectively identified at base_lr = 0 .05 , where the Oracle estimator achieves its minimum cross-trial standard deviation. 

base_lr Regime Description Oracle Mean-based SIVE 

0.0001 Complete Mixing Failure 3.3124 ± 0.7967 4.0592 ± 2.9188 0.0010 Poor Mixing (trapped) 0.2959 ± 0.2465 0.2349 ± 0.1881 0.0050 Slow Mixing 0.3325 ± 0.1669 0.3747 ± 0.3230 0.0100 Approaching Optimal Stability 0.3544 ± 0.0791 0.4046 ± 0.2046 

0.0500 Optimal Stability (Default) 0.3980 ± 0.0424 0.4310 ± 0.0961 

0.1000 Moderate ULA Inflation 0.4538 ± 0.0682 0.4808 ± 0.1063 0.5000 Severe Discretization Instability 0.5203 ± 0.1248 3.0707 ± 4.8986 1.0000 Numerical Divergence 0.5718 ± 0.1379 9.4489 ± 17 .1410 

As shown in Table 5, minuscule step sizes ( ≤ 0.005 ) fail to traverse the singular geometry within 

M steps, leaving chains trapped at varying altitudes on the transition slopes (substantial cross-trial variance). Conversely, excessively large step sizes ( ≥ 0.5) cause discrete updates to systematically overshoot the continuous-time Langevin trajectories, leading to severe ULA discretization insta-bility (Appendix B.1). The value base_lr = 0 .05 emerges as the objective operational optimal configuration, minimizing trajectory noise while maintaining robust state exploration. 21 E.4 Evaluation-Group Sensitivity to N

SIVE dynamically subtracts the empirical noise floor using the within-group sample variance s2

> m

.By the Law of Total Variance, the raw variance of the grouped empirical losses absorbs a structural artifact equal to E[t2s2

> m

/N ] = t2σ2/N . For t = 10 4 and σ = 0 .002 , this uncorrected artifact scales to 400 /N , significantly dominating the O(1) geometric signal. Our debiasing step subtracts this average noise profile ˆC = t2

> M

∑Mm=1  

> s2
> m
> N

. However, because 

s2 

> m

follows a scaled Chi-squared distribution, the correction term carries an inherent statistical uncertainty. Following standard variance propagation, the dimension-aligned uncertainty (standard deviation) of the correction term scales as: 

Std[ ˆC] = 

( 400 

N

) √

2

M (N − 1) . (58) Table 6 compares SIVE against the privileged Oracle Mean estimator across varying N . To eliminate pseudo-random trajectory variance, we track the paired difference ( ∆ = Oracle − SIVE) computed step-by-step on identical MCMC trajectories. Table 6: Evaluation-group sensitivity on the singular toy model K2(u, v ) = u2v2. The theoretically predicted statistical uncertainty Std[ ˆC] closely matches the empirically observed standard deviation of the paired difference ∆.

N Oracle Mean-based SIVE Theoretical Std[ ˆC] Paired Difference ∆2 0.4057 ± 0.0483 1.8260 ± 1.1970 1.0690 −1.4202 ± 1.1541 4 0.3651 ± 0.0571 0.5277 ± 0.4193 0.3086 −0.1626 ± 0.3983 8 0.4300 ± 0.0772 0.4323 ± 0.3739 0.1010 −0.0023 ± 0.3729 16 0.4300 ± 0.0772 0.3856 ± 0.1033 0.0345 0.0444 ± 0.1300 32 0.3899 ± 0.0474 0.3834 ± 0.0880 0.0120 0.0064 ± 0.0626 

64 0.3980 ± 0.0424 0.4310 ± 0.0961 0.0042 −0.0330 ± 0.0589 

128 0.4286 ± 0.0820 0.4522 ± 0.1262 0.0015 −0.0236 ± 0.0499 256 0.4214 ± 0.0699 0.4613 ± 0.1098 0.0005 −0.0399 ± 0.0426 512 0.4960 ± 0.0545 0.5207 ± 0.0930 0.0002 −0.0248 ± 0.0408 1024 0.3872 ± 0.0657 0.3664 ± 0.1059 0.0001 0.0208 ± 0.0513 2048 0.3941 ± 0.0636 0.3874 ± 0.0804 0.0000 0.0067 ± 0.0301 

The empirical fluctuations in the paired difference strictly follow the theoretical dimension-aligned uncertainty Std[ ˆC]. At N = 2 , the residual error ( ±1.1541 ) is entirely driven by the finite-sample Chi-squared variance of the correction term. As N increases, both the raw noise floor and its corresponding estimation variance are substantially suppressed. At N = 64 and beyond, the theoretical uncertainty approaches zero, allowing SIVE to robustly lock onto the precise geometric trajectory mapped by the privileged Oracle. 

# F Implementation and Hyperparameter Translation for Deep Neu-ral Networks 

Transitioning the localized SGLD probe from controlled toy models to overparameterized neural networks introduces practical challenges: the true local minimum L⋆k is inaccessible mid-training, 22 precluding objective on-the-fly calibration of sampler bias. To deploy the estimator robustly in this setting, we rely on controlled hyperparameter transfer from the earlier theoretical ablations, explicit decoupling of stochastic noise sources, and hardware-accelerated vectorization. 

F.1 Thermodynamic Translation and Adaptive Localization 

Without access to the absolute local minimum mid-training, runtime calibration of the Unadjusted Langevin Algorithm (ULA) discretization bias is infeasible. We therefore transfer the optimal thermodynamic step size identified in the controlled ablations (Appendix E.3), uniformly fixing 

base_lr = 0 .05 across all deep learning experiments. To maintain scale invariance across different architectures and training phases, we dynamically scale the physical localization radius using the root mean square (RMS) of the network weights at the checkpoint θtk :

hadaptive = h ∥θtk ∥√d , (59) where d is the total number of parameters. This dynamic scaling ensures that the Gaussian tether imposes a consistent relative spatial perturbation per parameter dimension, regardless of the macro-scopic norm of the weights. 

F.2 Decoupling Gradient Dynamics and Observation Noise 

Neural network experiments rely on mini-batch subsampling, which injects stochasticity into both the SGLD parameter dynamics and the geometric loss measurements. To control these effects independently, we separate the gradient mini-batch size Bgrad (used strictly for the Langevin drift) from the evaluation mini-batch size Beval (used strictly to measure the local energy state). To keep the Langevin drift trajectory aligned with the full empirical-loss gradient and suppress trajectory noise, we utilize a large gradient mini-batch, fixing Bgrad = 1024 (approximately 1.7% of the MNIST training data). This stabilization of the Markov chain remains computationally practical on modern accelerators because gradients are computed only once per SGLD step. In contrast, Beval is controlled independently, as it governs the observation noise injected into the variance-based LLC measurement. 

F.3 Vectorized Scaling of the Evaluation Group N

At each SGLD step, our noise-debiasing methodology requires sampling N independent evaluation mini-batches, each of size Beval . If σ2single denotes the variance of the per-sample loss, the additive observation variance embedded within the grouped empirical mean scales according to: 

Var[ ¯Lm] = σ2single 

N B eval 

. (60) Consequently, the raw observation-noise floor is bounded by the total number of evaluated ex-amples, N B eval . More critically, the statistical precision of the empirical noise correction term depends entirely on the degrees of freedom ( N − 1) of the within-group sample variance s2

> m

. For a fixed evaluation budget, allocating resources to a larger N substantially reduces the estimation uncertainty of the debiasing step. A naive implementation requires N sequential forward passes per SGLD step, inducing severe computational bottlenecks. We circumvent this constraint by utilizing PyTorch’s functional APIs (torch.func.functional_call ). We generate an index tensor of shape (N, B eval ), flatten it into 23 a single batched dimension of size N B eval , execute a singular vectorized forward pass, and reshape the unreduced per-sample losses back to their (N, B eval ) topological structure. This circumvents the standard memory-computation trade-off, allowing the empirical debiasing term to be estimated with high statistical precision without prohibitive sequential bottlenecking. Whereas the controlled toy-model diagnostics use N = 64 to expose the scaling of the correction term, the neural-network experiments leverage vectorization to allocate larger evaluation groups, fixing N = 512 with Beval = 64 .24 G Raw Results for the DNN Experiment 

This appendix provides the raw numerical records corresponding to the training trajectory plotted in Section 4.2. The row labeled epoch 0 corresponds to the unoptimized randomly initialized network. Strictly speaking, this point is not part of the optimization trajectory and is therefore omitted from the plot in Section 4.2; it is included here only as a reference for the raw numerical record. 

Takeaway: The numerical records illustrate the different failure modes and sensitivities of the three operational LLC estimators. Under the aligned localization setting used in this experiment, the Online estimator converges to the endpoint value ≈ 98 , consistent with the scale expected from the corresponding endpoint LLC protocol. However, throughout training it remains relatively compressed, varying mostly between ≈ 100 and ≈ 240 , and therefore provides only a weak dynamic signal. The Retrospective estimator exhibits the opposite pathology. Because it anchors all checkpoints to a final loss floor, it starts at an artificially inflated value of ≈ 7019 and then monotonically decays to the same endpoint value ≈ 98 . This behavior primarily reflects the macroscopic decrease in training loss rather than a purely local change in geometric complexity, illustrating the anchoring artifact discussed in Appendix C. In contrast, SIVE removes the explicit additive baseline and produces a non-monotone local fluctuation signal. After a large early-transient value of ≈ 4574 , it rapidly decreases, reaches a broad minimum around ≈ 175 during the mid-training phase, and then rebounds to ≈ 230 near the end of training. This late-training rebound occurs while the training loss continues to decrease and the test loss has largely saturated. Thus, SIVE separates the large-scale loss descent from a residual local geometric signal and reveals a post-saturation increase in the variance-based operational LLC estimate. This pattern is consistent with the empirical SLT hypothesis that local complexity may rise again after the generalization-improving phase, although the present experiment should be interpreted as diagnostic evidence rather than a definitive claim about overfitting-induced LLC growth. 

Epoch TrainLoss TestLoss Online Retrospective SIVE 

0 0.0000 0.0000 305 .6935 ± 14 .5779 7019 .5696 ± 5.4915 4574 .2894 ± 226 .4581 

1 1.6910 0.7625 244 .4062 ± 26 .2280 4305 .8864 ± 4.8256 1410 .2531 ± 53 .4990 

2 0.5554 0.4224 206 .8323 ± 13 .2536 3284 .2616 ± 4.8907 620 .6395 ± 32 .6893 

3 0.3952 0.3453 217 .0289 ± 12 .1969 2903 .8002 ± 4.1819 448 .4780 ± 21 .8573 

4 0.3444 0.3126 207 .5439 ± 10 .1416 2663 .9290 ± 4.7403 409 .7792 ± 28 .4689 

5 0.3151 0.2910 200 .3314 ± 8.5917 2476 .6437 ± 4.2343 365 .6176 ± 25 .9233 

6 0.2936 0.2715 191 .7686 ± 7.0958 2313 .8303 ± 5.2410 352 .5791 ± 20 .2830 

7 0.2756 0.2574 191 .4157 ± 7.9695 2164 .7308 ± 4.4652 328 .2269 ± 8.3789 

8 0.2591 0.2431 195 .1149 ± 8.3137 2029 .9211 ± 4.2763 319 .1053 ± 24 .5472 

9 0.2439 0.2298 181 .2629 ± 10 .9457 1905 .5959 ± 5.2171 304 .8436 ± 11 .3001 

10 0.2296 0.2171 175 .6204 ± 9.6474 1794 .3991 ± 4.3807 285 .1773 ± 21 .4857 

25 Epoch TrainLoss TestLoss Online Retrospective SIVE 

11 0.2174 0.2089 176 .7544 ± 10 .7161 1691 .8545 ± 3.7182 273 .6002 ± 13 .8222 

12 0.2065 0.1971 177 .6797 ± 10 .5197 1600 .5892 ± 4.3814 256 .3642 ± 21 .8803 

13 0.1962 0.1897 167 .2317 ± 6.2234 1516 .0066 ± 4.3358 252 .8902 ± 12 .5175 

14 0.1867 0.1808 162 .4368 ± 12 .9894 1437 .9914 ± 4.1109 238 .6423 ± 16 .4761 

15 0.1780 0.1738 163 .5365 ± 7.3923 1367 .4095 ± 4.4043 233 .3073 ± 14 .0815 

16 0.1702 0.1653 149 .5657 ± 5.8629 1300 .3964 ± 3.8090 225 .4638 ± 9.8794 

17 0.1632 0.1637 159 .6562 ± 10 .8478 1239 .9350 ± 5.2891 222 .7569 ± 11 .4760 

18 0.1560 0.1568 156 .7316 ± 15 .6557 1182 .4883 ± 4.9130 216 .7841 ± 10 .4439 

19 0.1496 0.1512 149 .7918 ± 11 .4491 1129 .9980 ± 3.8675 208 .9405 ± 18 .4113 

20 0.1437 0.1474 146 .7779 ± 5.0979 1080 .4513 ± 4.0143 209 .1843 ± 15 .4987 

21 0.1380 0.1429 142 .8559 ± 5.8127 1033 .9574 ± 4.0909 207 .6137 ± 19 .3054 

22 0.1330 0.1384 146 .3999 ± 12 .4197 990 .9628 ± 3.6140 197 .5283 ± 7.1382 

23 0.1283 0.1349 139 .5860 ± 4.0991 951 .8054 ± 4.6580 198 .1794 ± 7.5746 

24 0.1237 0.1314 141 .3813 ± 5.4054 913 .5689 ± 4.3656 198 .8901 ± 13 .2100 

25 0.1193 0.1274 133 .3867 ± 4.3371 878 .7116 ± 3.5820 196 .3425 ± 11 .1242 

26 0.1156 0.1233 137 .6759 ± 11 .3610 845 .7357 ± 4.6726 183 .7516 ± 8.5394 

27 0.1117 0.1207 129 .4046 ± 4.0028 814 .2926 ± 4.5250 187 .3642 ± 5.0560 

28 0.1082 0.1206 128 .4466 ± 6.9600 784 .0671 ± 3.9038 183 .2612 ± 10 .4588 

29 0.1046 0.1184 133 .4491 ± 7.6373 755 .5153 ± 4.2420 180 .5470 ± 14 .1616 

30 0.1015 0.1148 127 .6226 ± 11 .0951 729 .8281 ± 4.3538 185 .0079 ± 11 .8786 

31 0.0983 0.1145 124 .5320 ± 7.6855 703 .8886 ± 4.5457 184 .4548 ± 5.0679 

32 0.0954 0.1109 123 .3168 ± 5.3326 679 .8395 ± 3.9311 184 .5719 ± 11 .7291 

33 0.0928 0.1086 119 .5022 ± 3.1709 656 .9905 ± 4.1800 176 .1066 ± 11 .2075 

34 0.0900 0.1050 121 .5010 ± 8.4044 634 .9885 ± 4.7712 186 .5789 ± 12 .1417 

35 0.0875 0.1048 119 .7357 ± 6.4843 613 .3129 ± 3.8927 185 .5025 ± 7.1835 

36 0.0849 0.1035 121 .1709 ± 5.2824 593 .9760 ± 4.2603 173 .5784 ± 12 .8240 

37 0.0827 0.1007 117 .7214 ± 7.4153 575 .0621 ± 3.5533 182 .1530 ± 3.6132 

38 0.0804 0.1051 118 .2163 ± 3.3086 556 .0740 ± 4.4306 179 .1000 ± 11 .0378 

39 0.0780 0.1006 118 .9521 ± 5.6537 539 .2346 ± 3.3620 177 .0898 ± 6.6483 

40 0.0762 0.0987 122 .6461 ± 13 .4004 522 .8932 ± 3.8716 181 .6877 ± 5.0322 

41 0.0741 0.0976 112 .2805 ± 5.1730 506 .0484 ± 3.4452 181 .8295 ± 7.1780 

42 0.0722 0.0957 115 .8127 ± 1.2396 490 .6026 ± 4.3777 177 .6771 ± 10 .9349 

43 0.0704 0.0940 113 .9570 ± 4.4846 475 .9606 ± 3.9007 176 .4015 ± 10 .5901 

44 0.0685 0.0939 109 .8008 ± 2.5696 462 .5056 ± 4.2692 182 .0040 ± 7.6186 

45 0.0667 0.0955 113 .3571 ± 5.2638 447 .8485 ± 4.4485 182 .6776 ± 11 .2513 

46 0.0650 0.0917 110 .3842 ± 5.3527 434 .8910 ± 3.7966 180 .2799 ± 8.1888 

47 0.0634 0.0921 113 .5339 ± 6.7210 422 .7803 ± 4.6414 184 .8175 ± 6.3553 

48 0.0618 0.0902 114 .4775 ± 13 .0611 409 .4123 ± 4.1289 183 .5730 ± 10 .6266 

49 0.0605 0.0888 110 .4794 ± 8.4105 397 .7403 ± 4.5112 188 .9683 ± 10 .3264 

50 0.0586 0.0913 109 .6469 ± 9.5548 385 .6345 ± 3.7221 185 .6771 ± 5.0207 

51 0.0574 0.0876 110 .1263 ± 10 .3337 374 .4715 ± 4.6442 188 .7490 ± 11 .6477 

52 0.0560 0.0884 105 .1944 ± 2.6861 363 .3880 ± 3.7858 183 .7768 ± 9.5185 

53 0.0546 0.0870 108 .8034 ± 9.3791 353 .1681 ± 3.8898 187 .9684 ± 7.8213 

54 0.0534 0.0857 108 .7127 ± 3.0872 343 .6613 ± 4.2319 184 .2854 ± 9.8979 

55 0.0520 0.0855 111 .2375 ± 5.2363 334 .4012 ± 4.2751 184 .1957 ± 6.7505 

26 Epoch TrainLoss TestLoss Online Retrospective SIVE 

56 0.0509 0.0843 107 .9592 ± 5.6434 324 .8052 ± 3.9325 182 .8753 ± 10 .3242 

57 0.0496 0.0842 109 .9568 ± 6.9310 315 .8415 ± 4.1797 191 .5437 ± 10 .1094 

58 0.0485 0.0834 102 .4429 ± 4.7615 307 .0733 ± 5.0449 186 .5147 ± 7.6503 

59 0.0475 0.0850 105 .6366 ± 2.2982 298 .5531 ± 4.5328 194 .4850 ± 3.9289 

60 0.0463 0.0826 106 .4805 ± 7.0970 290 .0135 ± 4.5124 179 .8349 ± 7.1653 

61 0.0452 0.0826 106 .3420 ± 3.9432 283 .0545 ± 3.8896 190 .7001 ± 6.5060 

62 0.0441 0.0827 106 .8016 ± 7.2108 274 .9521 ± 4.0158 196 .4563 ± 6.2090 

63 0.0432 0.0821 104 .9632 ± 7.5149 267 .2266 ± 4.3221 193 .1065 ± 7.0322 

64 0.0422 0.0835 106 .5517 ± 9.0993 260 .5114 ± 4.2493 186 .5114 ± 10 .5238 

65 0.0414 0.0810 105 .0814 ± 3.0953 252 .9169 ± 4.3162 204 .4385 ± 10 .0767 

66 0.0403 0.0811 104 .7099 ± 5.3169 245 .9779 ± 4.3195 198 .0750 ± 5.5594 

67 0.0394 0.0830 98 .6757 ± 3.1634 239 .2581 ± 4.1837 194 .4495 ± 15 .3281 

68 0.0385 0.0808 101 .7513 ± 7.1594 233 .4418 ± 4.6090 195 .5051 ± 13 .8845 

69 0.0377 0.0816 102 .8158 ± 6.7757 226 .9487 ± 4.2211 200 .8444 ± 4.2063 

70 0.0370 0.0792 98 .2432 ± 6.0614 221 .1335 ± 4.5387 193 .9073 ± 6.8682 

71 0.0360 0.0810 98 .7801 ± 2.8220 214 .7803 ± 3.6079 196 .2433 ± 13 .6079 

72 0.0351 0.0801 104 .1887 ± 8.6311 209 .7997 ± 4.4860 199 .1701 ± 15 .1759 

73 0.0344 0.0799 105 .4060 ± 7.2478 203 .6277 ± 3.9432 200 .2327 ± 13 .7595 

74 0.0336 0.0791 97 .4877 ± 6.0078 198 .8079 ± 4.1072 196 .1837 ± 8.8389 

75 0.0329 0.0786 102 .3636 ± 6.1603 192 .4719 ± 4.5084 207 .0234 ± 3.4573 

76 0.0320 0.0792 98 .6370 ± 6.7775 187 .8795 ± 3.8754 207 .2840 ± 11 .1474 

77 0.0317 0.0794 96 .2403 ± 4.0268 182 .6374 ± 3.8492 201 .2621 ± 4.4519 

78 0.0308 0.0790 94 .4924 ± 3.2979 177 .3108 ± 4.1519 204 .3859 ± 10 .7957 

79 0.0301 0.0790 96 .9104 ± 5.3866 173 .1725 ± 4.6568 204 .4113 ± 7.7208 

80 0.0295 0.0786 97 .8887 ± 4.6285 168 .7112 ± 4.0360 206 .6088 ± 10 .6721 

81 0.0289 0.0785 95 .6188 ± 7.0367 164 .7156 ± 4.4970 206 .1388 ± 2.0766 

82 0.0283 0.0778 94 .0747 ± 3.3084 159 .6021 ± 4.8643 208 .8186 ± 4.7671 

83 0.0276 0.0786 94 .0986 ± 3.3649 155 .5452 ± 4.7440 204 .6620 ± 4.9829 

84 0.0271 0.0790 95 .4788 ± 5.2670 151 .6849 ± 4.8309 218 .3651 ± 8.9207 

85 0.0264 0.0775 97 .7503 ± 6.8287 147 .6950 ± 4.1490 215 .2804 ± 3.3576 

86 0.0258 0.0785 95 .8649 ± 3.8486 143 .0133 ± 4.0275 215 .4440 ± 6.3519 

87 0.0252 0.0777 94 .9082 ± 5.6212 139 .4838 ± 5.3908 211 .8701 ± 13 .0789 

88 0.0247 0.0776 96 .8846 ± 6.2466 135 .2284 ± 4.4575 201 .7611 ± 10 .4854 

89 0.0242 0.0780 98 .2371 ± 3.7576 131 .6475 ± 4.2468 219 .1141 ± 10 .9086 

90 0.0239 0.0817 97 .1279 ± 8.7894 128 .0168 ± 4.0151 218 .3517 ± 11 .4729 

91 0.0233 0.0783 95 .4048 ± 4.5624 124 .6006 ± 4.5566 222 .7664 ± 9.8712 

92 0.0228 0.0782 99 .0333 ± 3.5412 121 .5486 ± 4.2370 228 .6115 ± 8.5890 

93 0.0222 0.0781 98 .0703 ± 4.2175 117 .9862 ± 4.0060 225 .0125 ± 8.8390 

94 0.0219 0.0777 96 .8696 ± 15 .9150 114 .9744 ± 4.2816 217 .6008 ± 7.9707 

95 0.0214 0.0785 92 .3407 ± 5.6190 111 .3930 ± 4.6089 219 .7210 ± 12 .1337 

96 0.0210 0.0773 92 .6616 ± 3.2542 108 .7914 ± 3.9677 230 .0575 ± 8.4167 

97 0.0206 0.0790 96 .8279 ± 6.2904 105 .7771 ± 3.7369 227 .1374 ± 10 .2024 

98 0.0200 0.0774 96 .9535 ± 5.2754 102 .8166 ± 4.3801 228 .8167 ± 7.3517 

99 0.0197 0.0771 96 .9922 ± 5.8961 100 .0824 ± 3.8862 228 .5997 ± 8.8655 

100 0.0191 0.0784 97 .7084 ± 4.2244 97 .7084 ± 4.2244 229 .1365 ± 5.8855 

27