Title: Spatial Disease Mapping and Disparity Detection Using Generative AI: An Amortized Bayesian Learning Framework

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.18146v1

Published Time: Wed, 17 Jun 2026 01:27:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 51

Markdown Content:
SPATIAL DISEASE MAPPING AND DISPARITY DETECTION USING GENERATIVE AI: AN AMORTIZED BAYESIAN LEARNING FRAMEWORK 

LUCA AIELLO* 1 AND SUDIPTO BANERJEE* 

Abstract. We introduce an amortized Bayesian framework for spatial boundary detection that generalizes posterior inference across areal graphs with varying numbers of regions and diverse adjacency structures. The underlying model couples a Poisson count likelihood with a covariate-driven rule to interrupt smoothing across dissimilar neighboring areas, utilizing a directed acyclic graph autoregressive (DAGAR) prior to capture residual spatial dependence. To approximate the target posterior distribution, a neural engine is trained on simulated maps: a permutation-invariant summary network encodes graph-aware representations of the observed counts, offsets, covariates, and adjacency matrices, while a conditional nor-malizing flow generates the approximate posterior draws. Simulation studies demonstrate accurate parameter recovery, near-nominal interval coverage, well-calibrated posterior pre-dictive behavior, and informative posterior boundary probabilities. Benchmarking against Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) confirms close agreement regarding primary boundary evidence, and an ablation study validates the inclusion of model-guided graph summaries. Finally, applications to Glasgow respiratory disease and California lung cancer data demon-strate that a single trained neural engine can be seamlessly deployed across real-world maps with distinct graph structures, yielding boundary conclusions consistent with established localized smoothing analyses. 

1. Introduction 

Disease mapping refers to the task of producing spatial maps exhibiting statistical esti-mates of counts or rates (e.g., incidence or mortality) to better understand the geographic variation of diseases (Koch, 2005; Lawson et al., 2016). Spatial dependence is introduced using stochastic models on graphs, where the nodes correspond to regions, and an edge between two nodes relates them as neighbors. Areal disease-mapping models are widely used in spatial epidemiology, public-health surveillance, and real-world evidence generation, where disease counts are observed over administrative or geographical units together with 

Date : June 17, 2026. 

Key words and phrases. Amortized inference; DAGAR prior; Bayesian spatial models; boundary detec-tion; BayesFlow; disease mapping; real-world data; calibration. *Department of Biostatistics, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 

> 1

Email: laiello@g.ucla.edu. 

> 1
> arXiv:2606.18146v1 [stat.ME] 16 Jun 2026

expected counts, exposures, risk factors, and adjacency information (Wakefield, 2007; Law-son, 2018). Standard Bayesian models typically borrow strength across neighboring areas through conditional autoregressive or related Gaussian Markov random field priors (Besag, 1974; Besag et al., 1991; Leroux et al., 2000). These priors stabilize noisy small-area estimates and produce interpretable smoothed risk surfaces. However, same can also be misleading when neighboring areas lie on opposite sides of a socioeconomic, environmental, administra-tive, or infrastructural boundary. In such cases, smoothing across the border may attenuate meaningful contrasts and obscure localized high-risk areas. A substantial literature has, therefore, considered boundary detection and localized smooth-ing in disease mapping. Early approaches identified boundaries post hoc from large posterior differences in fitted risks across adjacent areas (Lu and Carlin, 2005), while later models introduced edge-specific indicators or neighbor-specific weights to weaken or remove spa-tial dependence across selected borders (Lu et al., 2007; Ma and Carlin, 2007; Ma et al., 2010). These formulations are flexible but can introduce many edge-level latent quantities, complicating posterior learning and prior specification (Li et al., 2015). More structured approaches link boundary formation to observed dissimilarities in explanatory variables, al-lowing smoothing to be interrupted across edges where neighboring areas differ sufficiently with respect to a relevant covariate (Lee and Mitchell, 2012, 2014; Rushworth et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2023; Aiello and Banerjee, 2023; Wu and Banerjee, 2025). In this article, we develop a reusable, amortized posterior approximation for heteroge-neous areal graphs for spatial boundary detection. The statistical model combines a Poisson observation model for areal counts, a covariate-driven mechanism that modifies the observed adjacency graph, and a directed acyclic graph autoregressive (DAGAR; Datta et al., 2019) prior for latent spatial effects on the resulting graph. By estimating the boundary param-eter jointly with the DAGAR residual dependence parameter, the model separates local boundary formation from residual effects. The posterior targets are therefore not only node-level disease risks but also edge-level posterior boundary probabilities and residual spatial dependence. This makes the model a useful test case for AI-assisted Bayesian inference: the inferential output is a full posterior distribution over scientifically interpretable spatial quantities, not a point prediction or a fixed risk score. The posterior distribution under this model is nonstandard because the graph itself de-pends on an unknown boundary parameter. A dataset-specific Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm can be constructed, but it must be rerun for each new map. Amor-tized Bayesian inference (ABI; Radev et al., 2020; Sainsbury-Dale et al., 2024; Zammit-Mangion et al., 2025) offers an alternate strategy: train a neural inference system on sim-ulated parameter-data pairs generated from the model, then reuse the trained system to approximate posterior inference for new datasets from the same deployment regime. In this sense, the neural network acts as a reusable posterior-computation device for real-world 

> 2

spatial analysis in which the same scientific question may recur across different regions, out-comes, or administrative partitions. This approach is closely related to simulation-based inference and neural posterior estimation with normalizing flows (Rezende and Mohamed, 2015; Papamakarios et al., 2017; Durkan et al., 2019; Papamakarios et al., 2021). For Bayesian workflows, however, amortization is useful only if the learned posterior ap-proximation is validated through recovery, calibration, posterior predictive checks, and com-parison with model-matched posterior computation (Cook et al., 2006). In our setting, this means treating the neural network as an inferential approximation whose uncertainty quan-tification, calibration, and range of reliable deployment must be assessed, rather than as a black-box prediction device. The key methodological challenge is that real-world maps do not have a fixed input dimen-sion. Different applications may involve different numbers of regions, adjacency structures, exposure patterns, and covariate dissimilarities. To address this, each simulated or observed areal dataset is represented as an unordered collection of node-specific, graph-aware feature vectors constructed from the observed counts, offsets, covariates, and adjacency matrix. The number of feature vectors is the number of areas in the map and can vary across datasets. A “SetTransformer” summary network maps this variable-size unordered set to a fixed-dimensional representation while preserving permutation invariance (Zaheer et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2019). A conditional normalizing flow then uses this representation to approximate the posterior distribution of the model parameters. The resulting network learns a posterior operator over a class of maps and adjacency graphs, rather than a posterior approximation tied to a single spatial layout. We aim for three specific contributions here. First, we develop an amortized Bayesian inference workflow that accepts varying-size areal graphs as input and returns approximate posterior draws for a spatial boundary-detection model. Second, we formulate the bound-ary model by combining covariate-driven edge modification with a DAGAR prior, yielding joint posterior inference for local discontinuities and residual spatial dependence. Third, we validate the reusable posterior approximation through parameter recovery, posterior cali-bration, posterior boundary probabilities, posterior predictive behavior, agreement with a model-matched MCMC-DAGAR benchmark, and deployment on Glasgow respiratory dis-ease and California lung cancer data with a comparison to the CARBayes package (Lee, 2013). Section 2 introduces the model, Section 3 describes the varying-size graph ABI work-flow, Section 4 presents simulation validation, Section 5 reports the empirical analyses, and Section 6 concludes. 2. Model 

We develop a hierarchical spatial model for areal count data with three components: an observation model for the counts, a covariate-driven mechanism that modifies the adjacency 

> 3

graph to accommodate local boundaries, and a DAGAR prior that induces residual spatial dependence on the resulting graph. This construction separates two distinct features of spatial variation: local discontinuities in smoothing and broader residual spatial dependence. Our inferential targets include the area-specific relative risks, posterior probabilities that geographic edges are “difference boundaries”, and the residual spatial dependence that re-mains after such boundaries have been accommodated. Thus, the model is designed to produce uncertainty-quantified spatial evidence at two levels: node-level disease risk and edge-level discontinuity structure. This distinction is important in repeated disease-mapping applications, where public-health interpretation depends both on where elevated risks occur and on whether adjacent areas should be smoothed together. Let i = 1 , . . . , N index the areal units, yi denote the observed count for region i, ei the ex-pected count, and xi an area-level covariate used to characterize local boundary information specified below. Conditional on a latent spatial effect wi, we specify 

yi | wi, β 0 ∼ Poisson( λi), log λi = log ei + β0 + wi. (1) Equivalently, λi = ei exp( β0 +wi), so that exp( β0 +wi) has the interpretation of a relative risk for area i with respect to the expected count ei. Under (1), β0 is a global log-risk intercept, while wi captures residual spatial variation after accounting for the offset. This specification is standard in disease mapping and spatial epidemiology; see, for example, Wakefield (2007) and Lawson (2018). 2.1. Covariate-driven boundary mechanism. We now specify the covariate-driven bound-ary mechanism underlying the model. Our construction is motivated by the literature on boundary detection in disease mapping, and in particular, by the formulation of Lee and Mitchell (2012) where adjacency relationships between neighboring areas are allowed to vary according to observed dissimilarity measures. In that framework, latent spatial effects are modeled using a conditional autoregressive (CAR; Besag et al., 1991) prior of the type pro-posed by Leroux et al. (2000). We adopt the same covariate-informed view of boundary formation, but replace the CAR with a DAGAR prior (Datta et al., 2019) for the spa-tial random effects. For details on explicitly incorporating adjacency information within a DAGAR formulation, see Aiello and Banerjee (2023). A substantial body of work has addressed spatial boundary detection under CAR-based disease-mapping models. Early approaches often identified boundaries post hoc through large pairwise differences in fitted disease risks across neighboring areas, yielding so-called boundary likelihood values (Lu and Carlin, 2005). Subsequent formulations introduced latent edge indicators or neighbor-specific weights, so that boundaries correspond to conditional independence or weakened dependence between adjacent random effects (Lu et al., 2007; Ma and Carlin, 2007; Ma et al., 2010). Although flexible, such approaches can introduce many edge-specific quantities, making posterior learning and prior specification more challenging 

> 4

(Li et al., 2015). More structured alternatives link boundary formation to observed dissimi-larities, allowing boundaries to be driven by covariates rather than estimated independently edge by edge (Lee and Mitchell, 2012, 2014; Rushworth et al., 2017). Recent work has further developed graph-based and multiple-outcome formulations, as well as Bayesian approaches to spatial disparity detection (Lee et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2023; Wu and Banerjee, 2025). Our model follows the covariate-driven perspective of Lee and Mitchell (2012), but differs in two ways. First, the residual spatial effects are assigned a DAGAR prior rather than a CAR prior. Second, the residual spatial dependence parameter is estimated jointly with the boundary parameter. This yields a formulation in which local boundary formation and residual spatial smoothing are modeled by distinct components of the hierarchy. Let A = ( aij ) denote the binary adjacency matrix of the areal graph, where aij = 1 if areas 

i and j are neighbors and aij = 0 otherwise. Following Lee and Mitchell (2012), we quantify the covariate dissimilarity between neighboring areas i and j by zij = |xi − xj |, where xi and 

xj are the values of the boundary-driving covariate in the two areas. To make the boundary parameter comparable across covariate scales and graphs, we rescale these dissimilarities using their empirical median over neighboring pairs, i.e., Z0.5 = median {zij : aij = 1 }. The elements of the effective adjacency matrix are then defined by 

a∗ 

> ij

=



1, if aij = 1 and exp( −ηz ij ) ≥ 12 ,

0, otherwise . (2) Equivalently, an observed edge is retained when ηz ij ≤ log 2 and removed when ηz ij > log 2. Therefore, neighboring areas with sufficiently large covariate dissimilarity are prevented from smoothing across their shared border. The parameter η therefore controls the degree of local boundary formation: larger values imply stronger penalization of dissimilar neighboring pairs, leading to the removal of more edges and sharper local discontinuities. Since η is inferred from the data, the boundary rule in (2) induces posterior boundary probabilities for each observed edge, Pr( a∗ 

> ij

= 0 | y), which can be used directly for uncertainty-aware boundary assessment or translated into a binary boundary map through a chosen decision rule. 2.2. DAGAR prior and parameter specification. Given the modified adjacency struc-ture A∗ = ( a∗ 

> ij

) through (2), we assign a DAGAR prior to the latent spatial effects. Let 

π = ( π1, . . . , π N ) denote a fixed ordering of the nodes, and define Nπ(πk) = {πℓ : ℓ < k, a ∗  

> πk,π ℓ

= 1 } to be the set of predecessors of node πk under this ordering. The DAGAR model specifies 

w ∼ N  0, σ 2

> w

Q(ρ)−1 , Q(ρ) = ( I − B)⊤Λ(I − B), (3) 

> 5

where w = ( w1, . . . , w N ), B = ( bij ) is strictly lower triangular and Λ = diag( λ1, . . . , λ N ). The nonzero entries of B and the diagonal elements of Λ are given by 

bij =



ρ

1 + ( ni − 1) ρ2 , if πj ∈ Nπ(πi),

0, otherwise ,

and λi = 1 + ( ni − 1) ρ2

1 − ρ2 ,

respectively, where ni = |Nπ(πi)|. Under (3), the parameter σ2 

> w

> 0 controls the marginal variability of the spatial random effects, whereas ρ ∈ (0 , 1) governs the strength of resid-ual spatial dependence on the graph induced by A∗. Unlike many CAR formulations, the DAGAR dependence parameter has a direct correlation-like interpretation, which facilitates prior specification and posterior interpretation. A key distinction from the boundary-detection framework of Lee and Mitchell (2012) is that ρ is treated as an unknown parameter and estimated from the data. In contrast, Lee and Mitchell fix the residual spatial dependence close to one in their CAR formulation so that smoothing is driven primarily by the local edge weights induced by the boundary mechanism. By learning ρ jointly with η, the proposed model separates local boundary formation from residual spatial persistence: η determines which edges are removed on the basis of covariate dissimilarity, whereas ρ determines the strength of residual smoothing over the retained graph. This separation is the main modeling distinction between the proposed DAGAR formulation and CAR-based localized smoothing models in which boundary formation and residual smoothing are more tightly coupled. The full parameter vector is θ = ( β0, σ 2

> w

, η, ρ ) and we assign the priors 

β0 ∼ N (0 , σ 2 

> β

), σ2 

> w

∼ HalfNormal(0 .5) , η ∼ Unif(0 , M ), ρ ∼ Unif(0 , 1) . (4) In (4), the prior on η is scaled by M = log(2) /Z 0.5, where Z0.5 is the median covariate dissimilarity over neighboring pairs. This scaling makes the boundary parameter comparable across graphs and covariate scales: η = 0 retains the original adjacency graph, while values near M allow edges with above-median dissimilarity to be removed. Thus, the prior on η

is specified on a graph-adapted scale governing the amount of covariate-driven boundary formation. The half-normal prior on σ2 

> w

mildly regularizes the marginal variance of the spatial random effects toward smaller values while retaining support for substantial residual heterogeneity. This regularization is useful because the magnitude of residual spatial variation, the resid-ual dependence parameter ρ, and the boundary parameter η are learned jointly; the prior therefore helps stabilize the separation between overall spatial variability, global spatial per-sistence, and local boundary formation. Taken together, the proposed hierarchy (1)–(4) defines a spatial Poisson model in which local boundaries are induced by covariate dissimilarity, while residual spatial association is modeled through a DAGAR prior on the resulting graph. The model, therefore, provides joint 

> 6

posterior inference on node-level risk, edge-level boundary probabilities, and residual spatial dependence, which are the primary inferential targets carried forward into the amortized posterior approximation. 3. Amortized Bayesian Inference 

Posterior inference is carried out using ABI. In statistical terms, ABI replaces repeated dataset-specific posterior computation by a supervised conditional-density-estimation prob-lem. We simulate many parameter-data pairs from the Bayesian model and train a neural conditional density estimator to approximate the map from an observed dataset to the cor-responding posterior distribution. Once trained, the same estimator can be reused for new datasets generated from the same deployment regime. In the present setting, the central challenge is that each dataset is observed on an areal graph whose size and adjacency structure may differ from one application to another. ABI is therefore used not only to avoid repeated dataset-specific posterior computation, but to learn uncertainty-quantified inference across a class of spatial graphs generated from the proposed hierarchical model in Section 2. The neural component does not replace the Bayesian model; it approximates posterior inference under the specified generative model. The ABI workflow used here has three components. First, a simulator generates syn-thetic areal datasets from the hierarchical model presented in Section 2. Second, a summary network maps each variable-size areal graph, represented through observed counts, offsets, covariates, and adjacency information, to a fixed-dimensional representation. Third, an in-ference network uses this representation to approximate the posterior distribution of the model parameters. The reliability of this approximation must then be assessed through pa-rameter recovery, posterior calibration, posterior predictive checking, boundary-probability assessment, and benchmark comparisons. 3.1. Training data generated from the hierarchical model. Let θ = ( β0, σ 2

> w

, η, ρ ) de-note the model parameters. Training is based on synthetic parameter-data pairs ( θ(g), D(g)), for g = 1 , . . . , G , where g indexes simulated training datasets. For each g, θ(g) ∼ p(θ), and 

D(g) ∼ p(D | θ(g)) denotes a synthetic areal dataset generated from the hierarchical model (1)–(4). Here D denotes the observable quantities available in an application: counts, offsets, covariates, and the observed adjacency matrix. Each synthetic dataset is generated as follows. A graph size N is sampled from the training design. Conditional on N , planar coordinates are generated, and a base adjacency matrix A

is obtained from the Delaunay triangulation. A covariate vector x is then generated, neigh-boring dissimilarities zij = |xi − xj | are computed, and the graph-specific scaling constant 

M = log 2 /Z 0.5 is calculated from the median neighboring dissimilarity Z0.5. The boundary 

> 7

parameter η ∈ (0 , M ) determines the modified adjacency matrix A∗ through the threshold-ing rule in (2). Given A∗, latent spatial effects are simulated from the DAGAR prior, and counts are generated from the Poisson observation model. This simulator defines the joint distribution p(θ, D) = p(θ)p(D | θ) used to train the amortized posterior approximation. Importantly, the training distribution is not tied to a single fixed map: graph size, topology, covariate surface, boundary structure, and resid-ual dependence vary across simulations. The simulator therefore defines the deployment regime over which the amortized posterior approximator learns inference and over which its reliability is later evaluated. 3.2. Summary network for variable-size areal datasets. A key feature of the proposed amortized workflow is that the input map is not assumed to have a fixed size. Different simulated and observed datasets may contain different numbers of areal units and different adjacency structures. We therefore represent each dataset D as an unordered collection of node-specific feature vectors, S(D) = {s1, . . . , sN }, where N is the number of areal units in the corresponding map. The length of this set is allowed to vary across datasets. A summary network then maps the variable-size set to a fixed-dimensional representation, 

z = hψ(S(D)) , (5) where hψ has parameters ψ. This step is what allows the inference network to operate on maps with different numbers of regions: the posterior approximation is conditioned on the fixed-dimensional summary z, while the raw graph-level input remains variable-size. The node-level features si are constructed from observed quantities only: the count yi,offset ei, covariate value xi, and the observed adjacency matrix A. The latent filtered graph 

A∗ and latent spatial effects w are not used as inputs, because they are unavailable in empirical applications and would not be available at inference time. The representation is model-guided. Its purpose is not to replace the spatial model, but to provide the amortized posterior approximator with observable information aligned with the inferential roles of β0, σ2

> w

, η, and ρ. The summaries retain information about four main aspects of the data. Marginal count and offset summaries, including yi, ei, log(1 + yi), log ei,and an offset-adjusted residual proxy, primarily inform the global log-risk level β0 and the overall magnitude of residual variation σ2

> w

. Neighborhood residual summaries, such as local averages and local roughness over observed neighbors, describe agreement or disagreement among adjacent areas and are informative about ρ and σ2

> w

. Dissimilarity-based summaries, including local covariate dissimilarities and dissimilarity-binned edge summaries, capture the relationship between residual jumps and covariate differences across neighboring areas and are designed to inform the boundary parameter η. Finally, graph-level autocorrelation, lag-concordance, and roughness summaries capture residual spatial dependence over the observed graph and are primarily informative about ρ.

> 8

Full definitions of all node-level, edge-binned, and graph-level summaries are provided in Appendix A. The main point is that the summaries are constructed from observable graph-indexed quantities, while the summary network learns how to aggregate them across maps of different sizes. In our implementation, the summary network hψ in (5) is a SetTransformer (Lee et al., 2019). This choice is natural because the numerical labels assigned to areal units should not carry inferential meaning, and because the number of areal units can vary across datasets. The SetTransformer aggregates the unordered collection S(D) into the fixed-dimensional rep-resentation z while preserving permutation invariance. Thus, the architecture separates two tasks: model-guided graph summaries encode information relevant to the spatial boundary model, and the SetTransformer learns how to aggregate this information across varying-size areal graphs. 3.3. Inference network and posterior approximation. The Bayesian inferential target is the posterior distribution of θ = ( β0, σ 2

> w

, η, ρ ) given an observed areal dataset D. Since D

may be observed on a graph with a different number of areas from other datasets, we first map it to the fixed-dimensional representation z through (5). The inference network then approximates posterior inference through a conditional density 

qϕ(θ | z) = qϕ (θ | hψ(S(D))) . (6) Thus, the learned summary z provides a common conditioning object for datasets whose original graph-indexed representations have different sizes. We use a conditional normalizing flow for qϕ in (6). The flow defines an invertible transfor-mation, conditional on z, between the parameter vector θ and a reference Gaussian variable 

u:

u = fϕ(θ; z), θ = f −1 

> ϕ

(u; z), u ∼ N (0, I).

The conditional density in (6) is the density induced by this transformation through the change-of-variables formula, 

qϕ(θ | z) = pu(fϕ(θ; z)) det ∂f ϕ(θ; z)

∂θ , (7) where pu is the standard Gaussian density. Training therefore uses the forward map fϕ to evaluate the density assigned to simulated parameters, whereas posterior sampling uses the inverse map f −1 

> ϕ

.The training objective can be understood as a conditional-density projection. The ideal target is to make the learned conditional density qϕ(θ | z) close to the conditional distribution of the simulator parameters given the learned representation. This corresponds to minimizing 

Ep(z) [KL {p(θ | z) ∥ qϕ(θ | z)}] . (8) 

> 9

For fixed z, the entropy term in the KL decomposition does not depend on qϕ. Therefore, as in likelihood-based training of neural posterior estimators and normalizing flows, minimizing the KL criterion in (8) is equivalent to minimizing the expected negative log-density assigned by the flow to parameters generated by the simulator (Radev et al., 2020). The summary network and inference network are therefore trained jointly on simulated parameter-data pairs using the objective ( ˆϕ, ˆψ) = arg min 

> ϕ,ψ

−Ep(θ,D) [log qϕ (θ | hψ(S(D)))] . (9) Thus, in the idealized limit of unlimited simulations, sufficient network capacity, and suc-cessful optimization, the learned flow targets the conditional distribution of the parameters given the learned representation z. In practice, the approximation may differ from the exact posterior p(θ | D ) because z may not be sufficient, the network class is finite, the simulator is sampled finitely, and numerical optimization is imperfect. This is why the amortized pos-terior approximation must be evaluated empirically on held-out datasets through recovery, calibration, posterior predictive checks, boundary-probability diagnostics, and benchmark comparison. For an observed dataset Dobs , we compute zobs = h ˆψ(S(Dobs )). Posterior samples are obtained by drawing u(ℓ) ∼ N (0, I) and setting θ(ℓ) = f −1ˆϕ (u(ℓ); zobs ), so that the resulting draws approximate qˆϕ(θ | zobs ). Algorithm 1 summarizes the training and deployment workflow corresponding to the ob-jective in (9). During training, simulated datasets are transformed into observed-data repre-sentations, summarized by hψ, and used to train the conditional flow. During deployment, a new observed map is passed through the fitted summary network and inverse flow to obtain approximate posterior draws. 3.4. Approximation and validation. The resulting posterior draws are samples from the learned approximation qˆϕ(θ | h ˆψ{S (Dobs )}), rather than exact draws from the Bayesian posterior. The preceding conditional-density-estimation argument clarifies the population target of training, but it does not by itself provide finite-sample or out-of-regime guarantees. Approximation error can arise from finite simulation, limitations of the observed-data repre-sentation, finite network capacity, and numerical optimization. This distinction is especially important here because posterior uncertainty is used not only for scalar model parameters, but also for edge-level boundary probabilities, decision rules, and public-health interpreta-tion. For this reason, validation of the amortized posterior approximation is an essential part of the proposed workflow. The central inferential question is not simply whether posterior samples can be generated efficiently for a new map, but whether the learned approximation provides reliable uncertainty quantification for the scientific targets of interest across the class of graphs on which it is intended to be deployed. In the validation analyses below, 

> 10

Algorithm 1 Amortized Bayesian inference for the DAGAR boundary-detection model 

Require: Simulator for ( θ, D), feature map S(·), summary network hψ, conditional flow 

fϕ, batch size B, number of posterior draws L 

> 1:

Training phase  

> 2:

repeat  

> 3:

for b = 1 , . . . , B do  

> 4:

Simulate parameters and data ( θ(b), D(b)) ∼ p(θ, D) 

> 5:

Construct the observed-data representation S(b) = S(D(b)) 

> 6:

Compute the summary representation z(b) = hψ(S(b)) 

> 7:

Evaluate the flow density qϕ(θ(b) | z(b)) 

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

Update ( ϕ, ψ) by minimizing the minibatch negative log-density loss  

> 10:

until convergence  

> 11:

Deployment phase for an observed dataset Dobs  

> 12:

Construct Sobs = S(Dobs ) 

> 13:

Compute zobs = h ˆψ(Sobs ) 

> 14:

for ℓ = 1 , . . . , L do  

> 15:

Draw u(ℓ) ∼ N (0, I) 

> 16:

Set θ(ℓ) = f −1ˆϕ (u(ℓ); zobs ) 

> 17:

end for  

> 18:

Return {θ(ℓ)}Lℓ=1 as approximate posterior draws from qˆϕ(θ | zobs )we therefore assess parameter recovery, posterior calibration, posterior predictive behavior, boundary-probability quality, and agreement with benchmark Bayesian analyses. 4. Simulation experiments 

The simulation study was designed to evaluate whether a single amortized posterior ap-proximator can learn reliable Bayesian inference across areal graphs of varying size and topology. All datasets were generated from the proposed Poisson areal count model with covariate-driven boundaries and DAGAR residual spatial dependence. The validation there-fore targets both components of the contribution: the statistical boundary-detection model and the learned posterior operator used to approximate inference for new maps. We as-sessed parameter recovery, posterior calibration, posterior predictive behavior, boundary-probability quality, agreement with benchmark Bayesian analyses, and practical deployment after the one-time training stage. 11 Fig. 1. Training loss over 100 epochs for the amortized posterior approximation. 4.1. Simulation design. The training and validation design was intentionally heteroge-neous. For each simulated dataset, the number of areas was drawn uniformly between 40 and 300, so that the amortized posterior approximator was required to learn across maps with different numbers of regions and different graph topologies rather than being tuned to a single spatial configuration. For each realized graph and covariate configuration, the graph-specific scaling factor M was computed from the median neighboring dissimilarity, and parameters were generated according to the prior distributions specified in (4) with 

σβ = 0 .5. Here, β0 controls the global log-risk level in the observation model, σ2 

> w

governs the mag-nitude of latent spatial variation, η controls covariate-driven edge deletion, and ρ controls residual spatial dependence under the DAGAR prior; see (1)–(3). This design defines the deployment regime for the amortized posterior approximation: graph size, graph topology, covariate dissimilarity structure, boundary configuration, and residual dependence vary si-multaneously. Training was performed online for 100 epochs with batch size 64 and 200 batches per epoch, so that the amortized posterior approximator was exposed to 100 × 200 × 64 = 1,280 ,000 synthetic datasets generated under the model. As shown in Fig. 1, optimization was stable throughout: the loss decreased from 3.259 at the first epoch to −0.710 at the final epoch, attained a minimum of −0.793, and averaged −0.700 over the last five epochs. This trajectory indicates stable optimization of a posterior approximation trained over substantial heterogeneity in graph size, graph topology, and parameter configuration. 4.2. Parameter recovery and posterior calibration. For validation, we used 200 held-out simulated datasets and obtained 10,000 posterior draws per dataset. In the realized validation sample, the number of areas ranged from 40 to 299, with mean 160.615 and standard deviation 72.840. Thus, validation was performed on maps spanning essentially the full graph-size range used during training. All posterior draws respected the required support constraints, with σ2 

> w

> 0, η ∈ (0 , M ), and ρ ∈ (0 , 1) in every case. 

> 12

Table 1. Parameter recovery on 200 held-out simulated datasets. RMSE is based on posterior means; r is the Pearson correlation between posterior means and true generating values across datasets; R2 is the corresponding coefficient of determination; coverage is empirical 95% interval coverage. 

Parameter Bias RMSE r R2 95% coverage 

β0 0.003 0.019 1.000 0.999 0.975 

σ2 

> w

−0.008 0.164 0.870 0.752 0.945 

η −0.020 0.150 0.707 0.491 0.955 

ρ −0.011 0.151 0.813 0.678 0.955 

Fig. 2. Parameter recovery on 200 held-out simulated datasets. Fig. 2 and Table 1 summarize parameter recovery on the held-out simulated datasets. Here, 

r denotes the Pearson correlation between posterior mean estimates and true generating values across datasets, while R2 is the corresponding coefficient of determination. Recovery was strongest for the global intercept β0, for which both bias and RMSE were negligible and the posterior mean was almost perfectly aligned with the truth ( r = 1 .000, R2 = 0 .999). Recovery was also strong for σ2 

> w

(r = 0 .870, R2 = 0 .752) and informative for both η (r =0.707, R2 = 0 .491) and ρ (r = 0 .813, R2 = 0 .678). This ordering is substantively reasonable: 

β0 is identified through the global mean structure, whereas σ2

> w

, η, and ρ must be learned indirectly through the interaction of latent spatial variation, boundary formation, and graph topology. Importantly, biases were small for all parameters and empirical 95% interval coverage remained close to nominal, indicating that the amortized posterior approximation preserves the main uncertainty structure of the generative model across heterogeneous held-out graphs. The width of the posterior intervals in Fig. 2 also illustrates an important feature of the approximation. Uncertainty is much tighter for β0, which is informed directly by the global count level, whereas intervals are wider for σ2

> w

, η, and ρ. This is expected because these pa-rameters are learned indirectly through residual variation, graph topology, covariate-driven edge contrasts, and spatial dependence. In particular, different combinations of boundary 

> 13

Fig. 3. Simulation-based calibration rank histograms on 200 held-out simu-lated datasets. strength, residual dependence, and latent variance can generate similar spatial count pat-terns, making these components intrinsically harder to separate. Thus, the validation results suggest that the amortized posterior is most precise for the mean component and more diffuse for the latent-structure components, while still maintaining small bias and close-to-nominal empirical coverage. Posterior calibration was assessed using simulation-based calibration (SBC), empirical in-terval coverage, and graph-size-stratified posterior discrepancy summaries. The SBC rank histograms in Fig. 3 are broadly consistent with calibration. Across parameters, the his-tograms show only mild irregularities and do not exhibit pronounced U-shapes, edge pile-up, or other patterns suggesting severe systematic miscalibration. This visual impression is con-sistent with the empirical coverage results: 95% interval coverage was 0.975 for β0, 0.945 for 

σ2

> w

, and 0.955 for both η and ρ. Overall, these results indicate that the amortized posterior approximation provides reasonably calibrated uncertainty quantification on held-out maps with varying sizes and graph structures. The corresponding ECDF-difference plots, graph-size-stratified posterior z-score diagnostics, and regime-specific error heatmaps are reported in Appendix B.1. 4.3. Boundary-probability quality and decision performance. A central feature of the proposed approach is that it returns posterior boundary probabilities for neighboring pairs, rather than only a thresholded boundary map. We therefore evaluated these proba-bilities directly on the pooled edge set across all held-out datasets. The posterior boundary probabilities achieved an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) of 0.970, an average precision (AP) of 0.882, and a Brier score of 0.057. These summaries assess complementary aspects of performance: ranking of true boundaries against non-boundaries, precision-recall behavior in the presence of potentially rare boundaries, and the accuracy of the predicted probabilities themselves. Taken together, the results indicate that the amortized posterior approximation produces boundary probabilities that are both highly discriminative and informative beyond any single thresholding rule. 

> 14

Fig. 4. Ranking diagnostic for posterior boundary probabilities. Mean sen-sitivity (left) and specificity (right) are shown as functions of the number of selected boundaries. Sensitivity excludes datasets containing no true bound-aries; at each selection count, averages use datasets for which the corresponding metric and selection count are defined. We next examined two pre-specified decision rules applied to the posterior boundary prob-abilities. Because sensitivity is undefined for datasets containing no true boundaries, sen-sitivity summaries were computed over the 161 validation datasets containing at least one true boundary, whereas specificity remained well defined and was computed over all 200 validation datasets. The FDR-controlling rule employed by Li et al. (2015) with α = 0 .05 produced a highly conservative operating point. Across datasets containing true boundaries, its mean sensitivity was 0.169 (s.d. 0.329), while its mean specificity across all datasets was 0.995 (s.d. 0.016). Thus, the rule selected only the strongest boundary signals and yielded very few false-positive selections, but at the cost of missing many true boundaries. This low-recovery behavior should be interpreted as a consequence of the stringent FDR decision rule, rather than as evidence that the posterior boundary probabilities are uninformative. Fig. 4 places this operating point in a broader ranking perspective by plotting sensitivity and specificity as functions of the number of selected boundaries. The posterior boundary probabilities induce a useful ordering of candidate edges: sensitivity increases rapidly as the highest-ranked edges are selected, while specificity remains high over a substantial range of less conservative operating points before declining as increasingly marginal edges are added. This shows that the posterior probabilities contain strong ranking information even though the FDR rule itself is too stringent for high boundary recovery. At each selection count, averages are computed over datasets for which the corresponding selection count and performance metric are defined. Under the median-probability rule, the amortized posterior selected on average 80.74 boundaries, compared with a mean true count of 91.24. Across the 161 datasets contain-ing at least one true boundary, mean sensitivity was 0.719 (s.d. 0.322). Mean specificity 

> 15

Fig. 5. Sensitivity (left) and specificity (right) under the median-probability rule. Sensitivity is shown for the 161 datasets containing at least one true boundary, while specificity is shown for all 200 held-out datasets. Dashed lines indicate the corresponding means. across all 200 datasets was 0.962 (s.d. 0.059). Thus, the median-probability rule recovered a large fraction of true boundaries while retaining high specificity, giving a substantially less conservative and more balanced operating point than the FDR-controlling rule. Fig. 5 shows that sensitivity is frequently high but heterogeneous across datasets, whereas specificity is strongly concentrated near one. This pattern indicates that the median-probability rule controls false positives well across most simulated graphs, while the difficulty of recovering all true boundaries varies more strongly with the number, strength, and spatial configuration of generated boundaries. The zero-boundary datasets are omitted from the sensitivity panel because sensitivity is undefined for them, but they remain included in the specificity panel. The posterior distribution of the total number of boundaries was also well calibrated. The true number of boundaries was contained in the corresponding 95% posterior interval in 0.995 of held-out datasets, and the posterior mass below the true count averaged 0.553. Overall, these results show that the amortized posterior approximation provides useful probabilistic summaries of boundary evidence, induces sensible ranking behavior across operating points, and captures the aggregate level of boundary uncertainty on held-out graphs of varying size and topology. Additional dataset-level summaries, reliability plots, and dissimilarity-profile diagnostics are reported in Appendix B.2. 4.4. Posterior predictive checks. Posterior predictive checks were conducted on 40 rep-resentative held-out datasets spanning the graph-size range, using 100 posterior predictive replicates per dataset. For each dataset and posterior draw, replicated counts were generated from the posterior predictive distribution induced by the amortized posterior approximation. 

> 16

We evaluated three classes of summaries: node-level count coverage, Moran-type residual spa-tial dependence, and edge-level residual contrasts stratified by covariate dissimilarity. For the latter two classes, posterior predictive p-values were computed as posterior predictive tail probabilities for the corresponding observed summaries. Node-level count coverage was strong: the observed counts fell within the 95% posterior predictive interval for a mean of 0.94 of areas per dataset, close to the nominal 0.95 bench-mark. This suggests that the amortized posterior predictive distribution reproduces the marginal count scale well across held-out maps. Moran-type summaries were also well reproduced. The observed Moran-type statistic was covered by the corresponding 95% posterior predictive interval in 0.975 of datasets, and the associated posterior predictive p-values were centered near 0.5, with mean 0.486. This indicates that the amortized posterior approximation captures residual spatial dependence without systematic under- or over-smoothing. Edge-contrast summaries stratified by dissimilarity bin behaved similarly, with mean pos-terior predictive p-values 0.535, 0.489, and 0.561 in the low-, medium-, and high-dissimilarity bins, respectively. These values indicate no systematic mismatch in the local contrast struc-ture, either among neighboring areas with small dissimilarities or among those with larger dissimilarities where boundaries are more likely to arise. Overall, these posterior predictive diagnostics support adequate fit at three levels: the marginal count scale, the global residual dependence structure, and the local edge-level contrast structure induced by the boundary mechanism. Thus, the amortized approximation reproduces not only scalar parameter uncertainty and boundary probabilities, but also key data-generating features on held-out graphs of varying size. Full posterior predictive plots and distributional summaries are reported in Appendix B.3. 4.5. Benchmark against model-matched MCMC-DAGAR. As a second validation exercise, distinct from the 200-dataset truth-recovery study above, we compared ABI-DAGAR with an MCMC implementation of the same thresholded Poisson-DAGAR model, denoted MCMC-DAGAR. The MCMC sampler was constructed to follow the localized updating logic of the CARBayes framework as closely as possible while replacing the latent CAR prior with the DAGAR prior used in the proposed model. We applied both methods to an additional bank of 100 held-out simulated datasets and obtained 10,000 posterior draws per dataset with each method. The goal of this comparison is to assess whether the amortized approximation reproduces the posterior behavior of a dataset-specific Bayesian sampler for the same statistical model. Fig. 6 summarizes the parameter-level comparison through mean absolute error and empirical 95% interval coverage. Agreement is strongest for the intercept β0, for which both methods recover the truth extremely well. For the spatial parameters, differences are more visible but 

> 17

Fig. 6. Comparison between ABI-DAGAR and model-matched MCMC-DAGAR on 100 held-out simulated datasets. Left: mean absolute error by parameter. Right: empirical 95% interval coverage. remain moderate: MCMC-DAGAR yields smaller mean absolute error for η and ρ, whereas ABI-DAGAR performs slightly better for σ2

> w

. Empirical 95% interval coverage is mixed rather than uniformly favoring one method: MCMC-DAGAR attains higher coverage for 

β0, ABI-DAGAR attains higher coverage for σ2 

> w

and ρ, and the two methods coincide for η.Thus, at the scalar-parameter level, the amortized posterior approximation broadly tracks the model-matched MCMC-DAGAR benchmark, with the largest discrepancies occurring for the latent-structure components that are also most difficult to recover in the truth-based validation study. Fig. 7 provides a more detailed view of the same benchmark. The scatterplots show that posterior means from ABI-DAGAR and MCMC-DAGAR are strongly aligned across datasets, indicating that the amortized approximation recovers the main posterior loca-tion. The boxplots show that the larger differences occur primarily in posterior spread for the latent-structure parameters, rather than in systematic shifts of posterior means. This distinction is important: the ABI approximation is not simply biased away from the MCMC-DAGAR benchmark, but tends to be more conservative for parameters whose information is carried indirectly through residual spatial dependence, graph topology, and covariate-driven edge contrasts. The ABI-DAGAR versus MCMC-DAGAR comparison also clarifies the nature of the re-maining approximation error. As shown in Fig. 7, the larger differences occur primarily in posterior spread for σ2

> w

, η, and ρ, rather than in posterior location. This alignment is strongest for β0 and remains substantial for the spatial parameters, although the agree-ment is weaker for the latent-structure components. The larger differences occur primarily in posterior spread for σ2

> w

, η, and ρ. This behavior is consistent with the conditional-density-estimation target of ABI: the learned posterior is conditioned on a fixed-dimensional 

> 18

Fig. 7. Detailed parameter-level comparison between ABI-DAGAR and model-matched MCMC-DAGAR on 100 held-out simulated datasets. Top: truth versus posterior mean, and ABI-DAGAR versus MCMC-DAGAR pos-terior mean, for each parameter. Bottom: distributions of posterior mean bias and 95% interval width across datasets. representation z = h ˆψ{S (D)}, rather than on the full dataset through a dataset-specific sampler. If this representation does not fully distinguish weakly identified posterior regimes, or if the finite-capacity flow smooths over ridges or weak multimodality in ( σ2

> w

, η, ρ ), the learned approximation may cover these regimes with a broader distribution. In this sense, the wider ABI-DAGAR intervals for η and ρ can be interpreted as conservative uncertainty for latent-structure parameters, while posterior location and edge-level boundary evidence remain broadly aligned with the model-matched MCMC-DAGAR benchmark. 

> 19

The edge-level comparison provides the most direct assessment of posterior agreement for the boundary-detection target. Posterior boundary probabilities from ABI-DAGAR and MCMC-DAGAR showed a mean correlation of 0.920, a median correlation of 0.957, and a mean absolute difference of 0.066. Under the median-probability rule, ABI-DAGAR se-lected 94.48 boundaries on average and MCMC-DAGAR selected 94.47, with mean Jaccard overlap 0.593. This indicates strong agreement in the underlying posterior boundary proba-bilities, with more moderate agreement after converting probabilities into binary boundary sets. Boundary discrimination was extremely strong for both methods: dataset-level mean AUROC and mean AP were numerically equal to 1.000 at the reported precision. ABI-DAGAR required 0.78 seconds per dataset on average to produce 10,000 posterior draws, compared with 2.84 seconds for MCMC-DAGAR, corresponding to a deployment speedup of about 3.64 after training. These timings characterize the deployment cost of the validated amortized approximation. The main inferential conclusion is that the reusable posterior approximator closely reproduces the model-matched Bayesian benchmark, espe-cially for the edge-level posterior boundary probabilities that are central to the proposed boundary-detection workflow. Additional boundary summaries and runtime diagnostics are reported in Appendix B.4. 4.6. Ablation study of summary statistics. Because the neural component relies on a learned representation of graph-indexed data, we conducted an ablation study to assess whether the engineered summaries provide statistically meaningful information for posterior inference, rather than serving only as a generic high-dimensional input representation. The baseline model uses the full summary design described in Section 3.2. We compared this baseline with six alternatives: removing the core observation features, graph-topology fea-tures, dissimilarity features, local spatial features, or global graph features one block at a time, and a core-observation-only representation. For each representation, we retrained a separate amortized posterior approximator from scratch using the same network architec-ture and training protocol. Thus, the ablation compares posterior approximations learned under different summary designs, rather than post hoc masking of inputs in a single trained network. All runs were evaluated on the same validation datasets; only the summary inputs were changed. Validation was performed on 4050 held-out datasets, consisting of 50 datasets for each graph size N = 40 , . . . , 120. Additional implementation details and full ablation summaries are reported in Appendix B.5. The most informative comparison is relative to the full-summary baseline, since the methodological question is which components of the model-guided representation are needed to preserve posterior quality. Fig. 8 shows the changes in scalar recovery metrics, mean absolute error and coverage, when each summary block is removed. The full representation gave the strongest recovery of the boundary parameter η, which is the central parameter 

> 20

Fig. 8. Differences in scalar recovery metrics relative to the full-summary baseline. for the boundary-detection component of the model. Removing any single non-core block produced only modest changes, suggesting some redundancy and robustness in the engi-neered representation. By contrast, the core-observation-only representation showed clear deterioration, especially for η and ρ, indicating that the core observation features alone are not sufficient for the full spatial boundary-detection task. Removing the core observation block also produced the largest degradation among the one-block ablations and substantially worsened the training and validation losses, indicating that these features remain important for stable learning. The same conclusion holds at the edge level. Fig. 9 shows the corresponding changes in boundary-detection performance relative to the baseline. The core-observation-only rep-resentation exhibited the clearest deterioration, with a large reduction in pooled AP and AUROC and a marked increase in the Brier score, demonstrating that the richer graph-aware and dissimilarity-aware summaries are important for producing high-quality posterior boundary probabilities. By contrast, the one-block non-core ablations remained compara-tively close to the baseline, indicating that these blocks contribute mainly through refinement and robustness rather than as isolated carriers of information. Taken together, the ablation study supports the use of the full model-guided summary de-sign. The representation contains some redundancy, but retraining under reduced summary sets shows that the full design provides the most stable balance across global mean recov-ery, spatial dependence learning, boundary-parameter inference, and posterior boundary-probability quality. 4.7. Computational performance. We report computational cost separately for the one-time amortization stage and posterior inference on new datasets. On an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-10750H CPU, the one-time training stage required 5 hours and 45 minutes. After training, generating 10,000 posterior draws for each of the 200 held-out validation datasets required 

> 21

Fig. 9. Differences in boundary-detection metrics relative to the full-summary baseline. 153.59 seconds in total, corresponding to 0.77 seconds per dataset, with a validation mem-ory footprint of 1.168 GB. The posterior predictive diagnostic block described in Section 4.4, based on 40 datasets and 100 posterior predictive replicates per dataset, required an addi-tional 23.52 seconds. Additional computational details are reported in Appendix B.6. These timings characterize the deployment profile of the validated amortized posterior approximation, rather than serving as the primary measure of methodological success. The main inferential question is whether the trained approximation remains reliable when applied to new areal graphs from the deployment regime. All experiments used fixed random seeds for graph simulation, parameter generation, neural-network initialization, minibatch generation, and posterior sampling. The seeds are reported in the accompanying code repository. Overall, the simulation experiments support the proposed ABI-DAGAR framework as a reusable posterior approximation for heterogeneous areal graphs. Across held-out maps of varying size and topology, the method recovered the model parameters, provided reason-ably calibrated posterior uncertainty, produced informative posterior boundary probabilities beyond any single thresholding rule, reproduced key posterior predictive features of the data-generating model, and remained practically deployable after the one-time training stage. 5. Real-data deployment and benchmark comparison 

We applied the trained amortized posterior approximation to two empirical areal health datasets with different graph sizes and spatial structures: the Glasgow respiratory disease dataset originally analyzed by Lee and Mitchell (2012), obtained through the R package 

CARBayes (Lee, 2013), and the California lung cancer dataset considered by Gao et al. (2023), extracted from the SEER ∗Stat database using the SEER ∗Stat software (National Cancer Institute, 2019). In both applications, the same trained amortized posterior approximator was used without dataset-specific retraining, and posterior inference was carried out jointly for θ = ( β0, σ 2

> w

, η, ρ ). 22 The empirical analyses have two aims. First, they illustrate deployment of a reusable posterior approximation on real areal health datasets with different numbers of regions, co-variate structures, and boundary patterns. Second, they provide an external benchmark by comparing the resulting boundary conclusions with those from a localized smoothing analysis implemented in CARBayes . This comparison is important because the goal of the amortized approach is not to redefine the scientific notion of a spatial boundary, but to assess whether a trained posterior approximation can reproduce the main uncertainty-quantified boundary conclusions of an established model-based Bayesian workflow on real areal health data. For each application, posterior summaries were based on 10,000 draws from the amortized poste-rior approximation. Posterior predictive checks for the empirical count data are reported in Appendix C.1. Additional fitted-risk comparison plots, edge-probability-versus-dissimilarity plots, and a model-matched real-data comparison with the MCMC-DAGAR implementation are reported in Appendices C.2–C.4. 5.1. Glasgow respiratory disease data. We first considered the Glasgow respiratory dis-ease dataset analyzed by Lee and Mitchell (2012), using the standardized income-deprivation covariate to define edge dissimilarities. The dataset contains N = 134 areas and 360 adjacent edges, with an average of 5.37 neighbors per area. The empirical median standardized edge dissimilarity was 0.597, corresponding to a graph-specific scaling factor M = 1 .162. The ABI-DAGAR posterior suggests a spatial regime in which local boundary structure coexists with strong residual dependence. The posterior median for the effective boundary parameter η was 0.830, with 95% credible interval (0 .114 , 1.137), while the posterior median for ρ was 0.878, with 95% credible interval (0 .455 , 0.975). Thus, the posterior places mass away from zero for both the boundary and dependence components. This indicates that the data are not well described by either a globally smooth risk surface or a completely fragmented one. Instead, the fitted model supports persistent residual spatial organization together with localized interruptions in smoothing. Using the median-probability rule, under which an edge is selected as a boundary when-ever its posterior boundary probability exceeds 0.5, ABI-DAGAR classified 134 of the 360 adjacent edges as boundaries. This corresponds to a dense boundary configuration, consis-tent with the posterior evidence for an active boundary mechanism. The Glasgow analysis therefore illustrates a real-data setting in which the trained amortized posterior approxima-tion identifies both broad residual spatial dependence and numerous local discontinuities in the risk surface. 5.2. California lung cancer data. We next considered the California lung cancer dataset discussed by Gao et al. (2023), using standardized smoking prevalence as the dissimilarity covariate. The dataset contains N = 58 areas and 139 adjacent edges, with an average of 

> 23

4.79 neighbors per area. The empirical median standardized edge dissimilarity was 0.698, yielding a graph-specific scaling factor M = 0 .993. Relative to Glasgow, the California analysis suggests a weaker and more localized bound-ary signal. The ABI-DAGAR posterior median for η was 0.471, with 95% credible inter-val (0 .017 , 0.964), while the posterior median for ρ was 0.816, with 95% credible inter-val (0 .050 , 0.990). The posterior therefore supports residual spatial dependence and some boundary formation, but with greater uncertainty about the strength of both components than in the Glasgow application. This pattern is consistent with a spatial regime in which smoothing remains broadly persistent, while local discontinuities are less widespread. Under the same median-probability rule, ABI-DAGAR classified 33 of the 139 adjacent edges as boundaries. The selected boundary set is substantially sparser than in the Glasgow analysis, indicating that the California data are characterized by fewer sharp local disconti-nuities. Taken together, the two empirical analyses show that the same trained amortized posterior approximation can be deployed without dataset-specific retraining on areal datasets with different graph sizes, covariate structures, and spatial regimes, while still providing joint uncertainty quantification for local boundary formation and residual spatial dependence. 5.3. Comparison with CARBayes . A natural empirical benchmark for the proposed ap-proach is the localized CAR model implemented by the S.CARdissimilarity function in the CARBayes package (Lee, 2013), which builds directly on the framework of Lee and Mitchell (2012). We therefore compared ABI-DAGAR with S.CARdissimilarity on both empirical datasets, using the same observed graph, the same standardized dissimilarity covariate, and the same median-probability rule for boundary selection. We treat this comparison as an external empirical validation exercise for the trained amor-tized posterior approximation. Since the two methods use different latent spatial priors, exact agreement in all posterior summaries is neither expected nor required. The most relevant comparison is at the level of the boundary mechanism: posterior boundary probabilities, se-lected boundary sets, and the spatial configuration of detected discontinuities. In the present single-dissimilarity setting, the effective boundary parameters are directly comparable at the edge-mechanism level. By contrast, the variance components play analogous roles but arise under different latent spatial priors, and should therefore be interpreted more cautiously. At the parameter level, the strongest agreement occurs for quantities directly tied to the mean structure and boundary mechanism. As shown in Table 2, posterior summaries for the intercept and the effective boundary parameter are similar in both datasets. In Glasgow, the ABI-DAGAR posterior median for η is 0.830, compared with 0.673 under CARBayes ; in California, the corresponding medians are 0.471 and 0.443. The intercept estimates are also closely aligned. The variance components differ more noticeably, especially in Glasgow, as expected given the different spatial prior constructions. A distinctive feature of ABI-DAGAR 

> 24

Table 2. Posterior medians with 95% credible intervals for ABI-DAGAR and CARBayes .

Dataset Parameter ABI-DAGAR CARBayes 

Glasgow β0 −0.239 ( −0.309 , −0.171) −0.220 ( −0.242 , −0.197) Glasgow σ2 

> w

0.336 (0 .079 , 1.100) 0.136 (0 .096 , 0.192) Glasgow η 0.830 (0 .114 , 1.137) 0.673 (0 .624 , 0.688) Glasgow ρ 0.878 (0 .455 , 0.975) —California β0 0.086 (0 .014 , 0.152) 0.095 (0 .071 , 0.117) California σ2 

> w

0.106 (0 .011 , 0.847) 0.033 (0 .017 , 0.059) California η 0.471 (0 .017 , 0.964) 0.443 (0 .310 , 0.716) California ρ 0.816 (0 .050 , 0.990) —is that it also provides posterior inference for the residual dependence parameter ρ, for which there is no directly comparable free parameter in the benchmark analysis. The ABI-DAGAR credible intervals in Table 2 are wider than those from CARBayes , espe-cially for the latent-structure parameters. This difference should be interpreted cautiously. First, CARBayes and ABI-DAGAR use different latent spatial priors and different depen-dence parameterizations, and ρ has no directly comparable free parameter in the CARBayes 

benchmark. Second, the model-matched MCMC-DAGAR comparison reported in Section 4.5 and Appendix C.4 shows that part of the interval-width difference is already present at the model-class level: DAGAR-based MCMC can yield wider uncertainty than the local-ized CAR benchmark for key spatial parameters. Relative to MCMC-DAGAR, the amor-tized approximation remains somewhat more diffuse, especially for η, but posterior centers and edge-level boundary summaries remain well aligned. We therefore emphasize posterior boundary probabilities and boundary-set agreement as the primary empirical comparison, while treating the scalar ABI intervals as conservative uncertainty assessments. The edge-level comparison provides the most direct benchmark for boundary detection. Table 3 shows that posterior boundary probabilities from ABI-DAGAR and CARBayes are highly correlated in both applications, with correlations of 0.862 in Glasgow and 0.863 in California. Under the median-probability rule, ABI-DAGAR selects more boundaries than 

CARBayes : 134 versus 99 in Glasgow and 33 versus 24 in California. The overlap is nev-ertheless substantial. In Glasgow, all 99 CARBayes -selected boundaries are also selected by ABI-DAGAR, while 73.9% of ABI-DAGAR-selected boundaries are selected by CARBayes . In California, all 24 CARBayes -selected boundaries are recovered by ABI-DAGAR, while 72.7% of ABI-DAGAR-selected boundaries are selected by CARBayes .Fig. 10 displays the spatial agreement between the two boundary-selection procedures. Blue edges are selected by both methods and green edges are selected by ABI-DAGAR but 

> 25

Table 3. Agreement between ABI-DAGAR and CARBayes (CB) under the median-probability rule.                      

> Dataset Risk corr. Bound. corr. ABI sel. CB sel. Shared ABI in CB CB in ABI
> Glasgow 0.767 0.862 134 99 99 73.9 % 100.0 % California 0.843 0.863 33 24 24 72.7 % 100.0 %

Fig. 10. Glasgow (left) and California (right) boundary agreement between ABI-DAGAR and CARBayes . Blue indicates boundaries selected by both meth-ods, and green ABI-DAGAR-only edges. not by CARBayes . In both datasets, all benchmark-selected boundaries are recovered by ABI-DAGAR. The additional ABI-DAGAR-only edges appear mainly as local expansions around the same dominant discontinuity structure, rather than as qualitatively different boundary patterns. The fitted risk surfaces are also positively associated, with correlations of 0.767 in Glasgow and 0.843 in California. This agreement is weaker than for the boundary probabilities, which is expected because the two approaches combine boundary formation with different latent spatial priors. For this reason, the fitted-risk comparison should be viewed as a secondary diagnostic, whereas the edge-level agreement provides the more direct evidence that the two methods lead to similar substantive boundary-detection conclusions. Additional fitted-risk comparison plots and edge-probability-versus-dissimilarity plots are reported in Appendices C.2 and C.3. For all CARBayes posterior summaries and boundary comparisons reported above, we used the longer MCMC configuration with 300,000 iterations, 100,000 burn-in iterations, and thinning by 20, yielding 10,000 retained draws. Under this setup, CARBayes required 615 seconds for Glasgow and 395 seconds for California. By comparison, generating 10,000 draws from the trained ABI-DAGAR posterior approximation required approximately 1 sec-ond per dataset. Including the one-time ABI-DAGAR training cost of 5 hours and 45 

> 26

minutes, the corresponding break-even points are approximately 34 Glasgow-sized analyses or 53 California-sized analyses. As a computational sensitivity check only, we also recorded shorter CARBayes runs with 20,000 iterations, 10,000 burn-in iterations, and no thinning; these required 45 seconds for Glasgow and 30 seconds for California, corresponding to break-even points of approximately 471 and 714 analyses, respectively. Thus, the empirical results shown in Tables 2–3 and Fig. 10 are based on the longer CARBayes runs, while the shorter runs are reported only to contextualize deployment cost. The timing details are reported in Appendix C.5. Neural-network implementation details, software versions, training configu-ration, and reproducibility information are reported in Appendix C.6. Overall, the empirical comparison shows that ABI-DAGAR reproduces the main substan-tive boundary conclusions of a localized smoothing benchmark in both applications. This is a central validation result for deployment: the same trained amortized posterior approx-imation, applied without dataset-specific retraining, preserves the main edge-level posterior evidence for boundary formation while substantially reducing the cost of repeated posterior sampling relative to the CARBayes benchmark. The contribution of the proposed approach is therefore to provide a reusable posterior approximation for the same scientific question, with uncertainty quantification retained at the level of model parameters and posterior boundary probabilities. At the same time, the DAGAR formulation extends the benchmark compari-son by providing joint posterior inference for residual spatial dependence through ρ, rather than requiring the dependence component to be fixed in advance. 6. Discussion 

This paper shows that amortized Bayesian inference can be used to learn posterior infer-ence across a family of spatial graphs, rather than for a single fixed map. The contribution is therefore not a predictive AI model, but a validated neural approximation to Bayesian inference for heterogeneous real-world spatial datasets. In many spatial health applications, the map is not a fixed object: new analyses may involve different regions, administrative resolutions, adjacency structures, outcomes, or numbers of areal units. Standard Bayesian workflows treat each such dataset as a new posterior computation problem. We instead train a single neural posterior approximator over heterogeneous simulated maps, so that posterior inference can be reused on new areal graphs within a validated deployment regime. In this sense, the neural network acts as an AI-assisted posterior-computation device: it supports model-based Bayesian inference without replacing the statistical model or its uncertainty quantification. The boundary-detection model provides a demanding test case for this idea. The posterior is not only a distribution over global parameters, but also determines edge-level posterior boundary probabilities through a graph that depends on an unknown boundary parame-ter. The model combines a covariate-driven adjacency modification, motivated by localized 

> 27

smoothing approaches in disease mapping (Lee and Mitchell, 2012, 2014; Rushworth et al., 2017), with a DAGAR prior for residual spatial dependence (Datta et al., 2019). This sepa-rates local discontinuities from residual spatial persistence and yields uncertainty-quantified inference at both the node level and the edge level. Thus, the amortized approximation is not merely learning a smoothed risk predictor; it is learning a posterior distribution for a structured spatial model whose inferential targets include boundary probabilities. The ability to handle varying-size input graphs is what makes the approach reusable. Each map is represented as an unordered set of node-specific, graph-aware summaries constructed from the observed counts, offsets, covariates, and adjacency matrix. The SetTransformer summary network maps this variable-size set to a fixed-dimensional representation while preserving permutation invariance (Zaheer et al., 2017; Lee et al., 2019), and the conditional normalizing flow then produces approximate posterior draws. During training, graph size, topology, covariate surface, boundary configuration, and residual dependence are all varied. The trained network therefore learns an inferential operator over a class of areal datasets, rather than a posterior approximation tied to one graph. This is the mechanism by which the method addresses a central source of heterogeneity in real-world spatial evidence generation: different studies may involve different maps. The validation study is essential to this claim. Across held-out graphs with 40 to 300 areas, the amortized posterior approximation recovered the model parameters with small bias, achieved empirical coverage close to nominal, and showed no severe systematic miscal-ibration under simulation-based diagnostics (Cook et al., 2006). Boundary-specific results were also encouraging: posterior boundary probabilities discriminated well between true boundaries and non-boundaries, showed good probabilistic behavior, and gave calibrated uncertainty for the total number of boundaries. Posterior predictive checks indicated that the approximation reproduced the marginal count scale, residual spatial dependence, and local edge-contrast structure induced by the boundary mechanism. These diagnostics are not secondary computational checks; they are what make the learned neural approximation a statistically credible inferential tool. The model-matched MCMC-DAGAR benchmark provides a second, complementary form of validation. Whereas the truth-based simulations assess recovery under known parameters, the MCMC comparison asks whether the amortized posterior reproduces the behavior of a dataset-specific Bayesian sampler for the same thresholded Poisson-DAGAR model. For the main scientific target of the paper, ABI-DAGAR and MCMC-DAGAR produced strongly correlated posterior boundary probabilities. This suggests that the reusable neural approxi-mation preserves the main edge-level posterior evidence for boundary formation, rather than merely producing a computationally convenient surrogate. A recurring pattern across the benchmark comparisons is that ABI-DAGAR reproduces posterior location and boundary-probability structure more closely than it reproduces scalar 

> 28

posterior spread for the latent-structure parameters. This distinction is important for in-terpreting the empirical analyses. The narrower intervals from CARBayes should not be treated as a model-matched uncertainty standard for ABI-DAGAR, because the two methods use different spatial priors and different dependence parameterizations. The more relevant comparison is with dataset-specific MCMC-DAGAR, where posterior centers and edge-level boundary summaries are broadly aligned, while the amortized approximation remains some-what more diffuse, especially for η. This behavior is consistent with a conservative amortized approximation for weakly identified latent-structure parameters, whose information is car-ried indirectly through residual spatial dependence, graph topology, and covariate-driven edge contrasts. It also suggests a clear direction for future work: richer graph summaries, higher-capacity flows, or graph-specific recalibration may sharpen scalar uncertainty while preserving the reusable posterior approximation. The empirical analysis reinforces the deployment argument. The same trained network was applied to the Glasgow respiratory disease and California lung cancer datasets, which differ in graph size, covariate structure, and boundary pattern. In both cases, ABI-DAGAR produced boundary conclusions broadly consistent with the localized CARBayes benchmark (Lee, 2013). Exact agreement is not expected because the latent spatial priors differ, but the high correlation in posterior boundary probabilities and the substantial overlap in selected boundary sets indicate that the amortized approximation captures the dominant boundary evidence in both applications. These examples illustrate the intended use of the method: once trained and validated, the same posterior approximator can be deployed on new maps without rebuilding the inferential machinery from scratch. The approach should nevertheless be interpreted within its training deployment regime. In this study, that regime consists of Poisson areal count data with offsets, sparse locally connected adjacency graphs, graph sizes comparable to those used during training, a single covariate-driven boundary mechanism, and DAGAR residual spatial dependence. Applica-tions with substantially different graph topology, outcome distribution, count scale, covariate behavior, overdispersion, or multiple boundary-driving covariates would require renewed val-idation, recalibration, or retraining. More broadly, the deployment regime could be expanded by training the amortized posterior approximator on a richer simulation design covering a wider range of graph structures, outcome distributions, or covariate mechanisms, although doing so would increase the up-front training cost because the network would need to learn across a larger and more heterogeneous set of scenarios. The present paper provides empirical validation rather than formal theoretical assurances for the amortized estimator; developing asymptotic theory for neural posterior approximations on varying-size graphs is an impor-tant direction for future work. This is not a weakness specific to ABI-DAGAR, but a basic requirement of simulation-based amortized inference: the learned posterior approximation is 

> 29

only as relevant as the simulator and training distribution used to define the inferential task (Radev et al., 2020; Sainsbury-Dale et al., 2024; Zammit-Mangion et al., 2025). Several extensions follow naturally. The current model uses a single boundary-driving co-variate, but many applications may involve multiple candidate drivers of discontinuity, such as deprivation, environmental exposure, urbanicity, demographic composition, or access to care. A more ambitious direction would encode the set of covariates through an additional permutation-invariant network and return posterior uncertainty for covariate-specific bound-ary relevance. Future work should also examine robustness to covariate measurement error and misspecification, and compare the present model-guided summaries with graph neural encoders or hybrid summary architectures in richer spatial settings (Sainsbury-Dale et al., 2025; Wikle and Zammit-Mangion, 2023). Amortized learning for complex multivariate spa-tial dependencies across regions using areal models (i.e., joint modeling of multiple dependent health outcomes; see Chapter 11 in Banerjee et al., 2025, and references therein) and sub-sequent boundary detection for health disparities (Aiello and Banerjee, 2023) has yet to be explored and will comprise future research. It is also worth noting that the transfer learning framework we investigated here is based on unsupervised learning. Supervised learning frameworks can be built by training the network using desired outputs. Here, we foresee future explorations by adapting the DeepRV framework of Navott et al. (2026) to train the nonparametric models in Aiello and Banerjee (2023). Alternatively, for simpler models such as in our current work, we can supervise the training using output from posterior analysis without computationally expensive MCMC or other iterative algorithms. Bayesian predictive stacking (Zhang et al., 2025; Pan et al., 2025), for example, uses conjugate posterior distributions to generate rapid inference and has recently been used effectively for amortized inference (Presicce and Banerjee, 2024). Such methods can be adapted for spatial boundary detection. Overall, ABI-DAGAR provides evidence that neural amortization can make Bayesian spa-tial inference reusable across varying-size maps while retaining an explicit generative model and posterior uncertainty. The key message is not simply that inference becomes faster after training. Rather, the paper demonstrates that a single validated posterior approxima-tor can learn how to perform Bayesian boundary detection on new areal graphs, producing uncertainty-quantified evidence about both residual spatial dependence and local discontinu-ities. This suggests a broader role for AI-assisted statistical inference in real-world evidence generation: neural networks can support, rather than replace, model-based reasoning by making carefully validated Bayesian workflows portable across repeated analysis with het-erogeneous spatial structures. 

> 30

Data availability 

The empirical datasets used in this article are publicly available from the sources de-scribed in Section 5: the Glasgow respiratory disease data are available through the R

package CARBayes (Lee, 2013), and the California lung cancer data were extracted from the SEER ∗Stat database using the SEER ∗Stat software (National Cancer Institute, 2019). Scripts for reproducing the empirical analyses are available in the code repository listed in the Software statement. 

Software 

Code to reproduce all results reported in the manuscript and Appendices is available at 

https://github.com/lucaaiello/ABI_boundary_detection/tree/main . The repository includes Python notebooks and scripts for simulated-data generation, amortized posterior training, posterior sampling, posterior predictive checks, ablation analyses, runtime sum-maries, tables, and figures, as well as R and Rcpp code for the MCMC-DAGAR and CARBayes 

benchmark analyses. 

References 

Aiello, L. and Banerjee, S. (2023). Detecting spatial health disparities using disease maps. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.02086 .Banerjee, S., Gelfand, A. E., and Carlin, B. P. (2025). Hierarchical Modeling and Analysis for Spatial Data . Chapman and Hall/CRC, 3rd edition. Besag, J. (1974). Spatial interaction and the statistical analysis of lattice systems. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological) , 36(2):192–225. Besag, J., York, J., and Molli´ e, A. (1991). Bayesian image restoration, with two applications in spatial statistics. Annals of the Institute of Statistical Mathematics , 43(1):1–20. Cook, S. R., Gelman, A., and Rubin, D. B. (2006). Validation of software for Bayesian models using posterior quantiles. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 15(3):675– 692. Datta, A., Banerjee, S., Hodges, J. S., and Gao, L. (2019). Spatial disease mapping using directed acyclic graph auto-regressive (DAGAR) models. Bayesian Analysis , 14(4):1221. Durkan, C., Bekasov, A., Murray, I., and Papamakarios, G. (2019). Neural spline flows. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 32. Gao, L., Banerjee, S., and Ritz, B. (2023). Spatial difference boundary detection for multiple outcomes using Bayesian disease mapping. Biostatistics , 24(4):922–944. Koch, T. (2005). Cartographies of Disease: Maps, Mapping, and Medicine . Esri Press Redlands, CA. 31 Lawson, A. B. (2018). Bayesian disease mapping: hierarchical modeling in spatial epidemi-ology . Chapman and Hall/CRC. Lawson, Andrew, B., Banerjee, S., Haining, R., and Ugarte, Maria, D. (2016). Handbook of Spatial Epidemiology . CRC press, Boca Raton, FL. Lee, D. (2013). CARBayes: An R package for Bayesian spatial modeling with conditional autoregressive priors. Journal of Statistical Software , 55(13):1–24. Lee, D., Meeks, K., and Pettersson, W. (2021). Improved inference for areal unit count data using graph-based optimisation. Statistics and Computing , 31:51. Lee, D. and Mitchell, R. (2012). Boundary detection in disease mapping studies. Biostatistics ,13(3):415–426. Lee, D. and Mitchell, R. (2014). A Bayesian localized conditional autoregressive model for estimating the health effects of air pollution. Biometrics , 70(2):419–429. Lee, J., Lee, Y., Kim, J., Kosiorek, A., Choi, S., and Teh, Y. W. (2019). Set Transformer: A framework for attention-based permutation-invariant neural networks. In Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 3744–3753. Leroux, B. G., Lei, X., and Breslow, N. (2000). Estimation of disease rates in small areas: a new mixed model for spatial dependence. In Statistical models in epidemiology, the environment, and clinical trials , pages 179–191. Springer. Li, P., Banerjee, S., Hanson, T. A., and McBean, A. M. (2015). Bayesian models for detecting difference boundaries in areal data. Statistica Sinica , 25(1):385. Lu, H. and Carlin, B. P. (2005). Bayesian areal wombling for geographical boundary analysis. 

Geographical Analysis , 37(3):265–285. Lu, H., Reilly, C. S., Banerjee, S., and Carlin, B. P. (2007). Bayesian areal wombling via adjacency modeling. Environmental and Ecological Statistics , 14:433–452. Ma, H. and Carlin, B. P. (2007). Bayesian multivariate areal wombling for multiple disease boundary analysis. Bayesian Analysis , 2(2):281–302. Ma, H., Carlin, B. P., and Banerjee, S. (2010). Hierarchical and joint site-edge methods for medicare hospice service region boundary analysis. Biometrics , 66(2):355–364. National Cancer Institute (2019). SEER*Stat software. Navott, J., Jenson, D., Flaxman, S., and Semenova, E. (2026). Deeprv: Accelerating spa-tiotemporal inference with pre-trained neural priors. Pan, S., Zhang, L., Bradley, J. R., and Banerjee, S. (2025). Bayesian Inference for Spatial-Temporal Non-Gaussian Data Using Predictive Stacking. Bayesian Analysis , (In press). Papamakarios, G., Nalisnick, E., Rezende, D. J., Mohamed, S., and Lakshminarayanan, B. (2021). Normalizing flows for probabilistic modeling and inference. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 22(57):1–64. 

> 32

Papamakarios, G., Pavlakou, T., and Murray, I. (2017). Masked autoregressive flow for density estimation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30. Presicce, L. and Banerjee, S. (2024). Bayesian transfer learning for artificially intelligent geospatial systems: A predictive stacking approach. arXiv preprint . arXiv:2410.09504 [stat.ME]. Radev, S. T., Mertens, U. K., Voss, A., Ardizzone, L., and K¨ othe, U. (2020). BayesFlow: Learning complex stochastic models with invertible neural networks. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems , 33(4):1452–1466. Rezende, D. J. and Mohamed, S. (2015). Variational inference with normalizing flows. In 

Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 37 of 

Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1530–1538. Rushworth, A., Lee, D., and Sarran, C. (2017). An adaptive spatiotemporal smoothing model for estimating trends and step changes in disease risk. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series C: Applied Statistics , 66(1):141–157. Sainsbury-Dale, M., Zammit-Mangion, A., and Huser, R. (2024). Likelihood-free parameter estimation with neural Bayes estimators. The American Statistician , 78(1):1–14. Sainsbury-Dale, M., Zammit-Mangion, A., Richards, J., and Huser, R. (2025). Neural Bayes estimators for irregular spatial data using graph neural networks. Journal of Computa-tional and Graphical Statistics , 34(3):1153–1168. Wakefield, J. (2007). Disease mapping and spatial regression with count data. Biostatistics ,8(2):158–183. Wikle, C. K. and Zammit-Mangion, A. (2023). Statistical deep learning for spatial and spatiotemporal data. Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application , 10(1):247–270. Wu, K. and Banerjee, S. (2025). Assessing spatial disparities: a Bayesian linear regression approach. Biostatistics , 26(1):kxaf048. Zaheer, M., Kottur, S., Ravanbakhsh, S., Poczos, B., Salakhutdinov, R., and Smola, A. (2017). Deep Sets. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30. Zammit-Mangion, A., Sainsbury-Dale, M., and Huser, R. (2025). Neural methods for amor-tized inference. Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application , 12(1):311–335. Zhang, L., Tang, W., and Banerjee, S. (2025). Bayesian geostatistics using predictive stack-ing. Journal of the American Statistical Association , (In press). 

> 33

Appendix A. Observed-data representation 

This section gives the full observed-data representation supplied to the amortized posterior approximator. The representation is constructed from the observed counts yi, offsets ei,covariate values xi, and the observed adjacency matrix A = ( aij ). The latent filtered graph 

A∗ and latent spatial effects w are not used as inputs, since they are unavailable in empirical applications. Section 3.2 of the main text summarizes the inferential role of the main groups of summaries; here we give their full construction. Let xi denote the covariate used to define edge dissimilarity. Before constructing edge-specific summaries, the covariate is standardized as ˜ xi = ( xi − ¯x)/(sx), where ¯ x and sx

are the sample mean and sample standard deviation of the raw covariate. For neighboring areas, define zij = |˜xi − ˜xj |, and ezij = zij /Z 0.5, where Z0.5 is the median of zij over observed neighboring pairs. The graph-specific scaling factor used in the boundary model is M =log 2 /Z 0.5.We use the offset-adjusted residual proxy 

ri = log( yi + 0 .5) − log ei.

The baseline node-level summaries are ˜xi, y i, e i, log(1 + yi), log ei, r i.

Let 

N (i) = {j : aij = 1 }, di =

> N

X

> j=1

aij .

For di > 0, define ¯ri = 1

di

X 

> j∈N (i)

rj , δi = 1

di

X 

> j∈N (i)

|ri − rj |.

We also compute local dissimilarity summaries ¯zi = 1

di

X 

> j∈N (i)

ezij , zmax  

> i

= max   

> j∈N (i)

ezij .

When di = 0, neighborhood summaries are set to zero. To capture information about boundary formation, we partition the neighborhood of each node according to standardized covariate dissimilarity: 

NL(i) = {j ∈ N (i) : ezij ≤ 0.75 },

NM (i) = {j ∈ N (i) : 0 .75 < ezij ≤ 1.25 },

NH (i) = {j ∈ N (i) : ezij > 1.25 }.

> 34

Let d(L) 

> i

, d(M ) 

> i

, and d(H) 

> i

denote the corresponding cardinalities. For each bin B ∈ { L, M, H },we compute ¯r(B) 

> i

= 1

d(B)

> i

X 

> j∈N B(i)

rj , δ(B) 

> i

= 1

d(B)

> i

X 

> j∈N B(i)

|ri − rj |, p(B) 

> i

= d(B)

> i

di

.

The summaries are set to zero whenever the relevant denominator is zero. Let E = ( i, j ) : i < j, a ij = 1 denote the observed edge set. For each edge, define ∆ ij =

|ri − rj |, Cij = ( ri − ¯r·)( rj − ¯r·), and ¯ r· = 1

> N

PNi=1 ri. Partition E into EL, EM , EH according to the same thresholds on ezij . Let ∆ B and CB denote the average of ∆ ij and Cij , respectively, over edges in bin B. We then compute 

G∆ = ∆ H − ∆L, GC = CL − CH .

We also compute the slope 

B∆ =

P 

> (i,j )∈E

(ezij − ¯zE )(∆ ij − ¯∆E )

P 

> (i,j )∈E

(ezij − ¯zE )2 ,

where ¯ zE = |E| −1 P 

> (i,j )∈E

ezij and ¯∆E = |E| −1 P 

> (i,j )∈E

∆ij . If the denominator in B∆ is zero, we set B∆ = 0. Let 

s2 

> r

= 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

(ri − ¯r·)2.

When s2 

> r

= 0, the standardized autocorrelation summaries are set to zero. At the node level, we include 

Ii = (ri − ¯r·)¯ ri

s2

> r

, Vi = (ri − ¯ri)2

s2

> r

.

Here Ii is a local Moran-type measure of agreement between node i and its neighborhood, while Vi measures local semivariance. At the graph level, we compute 

Cedge = 1

|E| s2

> r

X

> (i,j )∈E

Cij , Clag = corr ( ri, ¯ri) : i = 1 , . . . , N , Blag = N −1 PNi=1 (ri − ¯r·)(¯ ri − ¯rN )

s2

> r

, ¯rN = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

¯ri,

and Γedge = 12|E| 

X

> (i,j )∈E

(ri − rj )2.

> 35

Fig. B1. Empirical coverage vs nominal coverage for the amortized posterior approximation. The graph-level summaries are replicated across nodes and appended to each node-specific feature vector. The resulting input vector is 

si =



˜xi, y i, e i, log(1 + yi), log ei, r i, d i, ¯ri, δ i, ¯r(L) 

> i

, ¯r(M ) 

> i

, ¯r(H) 

> i

, δ (L) 

> i

, δ (M ) 

> i

, δ (H) 

> i

,p(L) 

> i

, p (M ) 

> i

, p (H) 

> i

, ¯zi, z max  

> i

, I i, V i, M, B ∆, G ∆, G C , C edge , C lag , B lag , Γedge 



.

Appendix B. Additional simulation diagnostics 

This section provides supplementary diagnostic plots and distributional summaries for recovery, calibration, posterior boundary probabilities, posterior predictive adequacy, the ABI-DAGAR versus MCMC-DAGAR benchmark, the ablation study, and computation. Unless otherwise stated, results are based on the same 200 held-out simulated datasets used in the main text, for which the number of areas ranged from 40 to 299. The ablation study uses a separate validation design described in Section B.5. B.1. Additional recovery and calibration diagnostics. This subsection complements the SBC rank histograms in Fig. 3 of the main text. Fig. B1 reports empirical coverage against nominal coverage. The curves remain close to the diagonal for all parameters, indi-cating generally well-calibrated posterior intervals, with only mild conservatism for β0.

> 36

Fig. B2. Simulation-based calibration ECDF-difference plots for the four model parameters. 

Fig. B3. Posterior z-scores, stratified by graph-size bin. Fig. B2 shows SBC ECDF-difference plots. The curves remain close to zero, suggesting no substantial systematic distortion beyond the mild irregularities already visible in the rank histograms. Fig. B3 stratifies posterior z-scores, i.e., ( θtrue − E(θ | D )) / sd( θ | D ), by graph-size bin, showing boxplot regarding. The boxplots do not suggest a pronounced graph-size-dependent shift or rescaling failure, indicating that posterior centering and uncertainty remain reason-ably stable across graph sizes. Fig. B4 reports mean absolute recovery error stratified by true ρ, true η, graph size, and edge count. Recovery of β0 remains uniformly accurate, whereas σ2

> w

, η, and ρ show 

> 37

Fig. B4. Mean absolute recovery error by true ρ, true η, graph size, and edge count. greater heterogeneity, as expected for parameters governing latent dependence and boundary formation. Errors increase gradually in more challenging parts of the design space, especially larger or denser graphs and settings with stronger spatial structure, with no narrow failure regime apparent. B.2. Additional boundary-probability diagnostics. For an observed edge ( i, j ), the posterior boundary probability, i.e. pij = Pr( zij η > log 2 | y), is estimated from the amor-tized posterior draws. This subsection evaluates these edge-level probabilities beyond any single thresholding rule. Of the 200 held-out datasets, 161 contained both boundary and non-boundary edges, while 39 contained no true boundaries. Dataset-level sensitivity is undefined when no true bound-aries are present, and AUROC and average precision are not informative in datasets contain-ing only non-boundary edges. These metrics were therefore summarized over the 161 datasets containing true boundaries. Brier scores, boundary-count summaries, selected-boundary counts, and specificity remained defined and were summarized over all 200 datasets. The number of datasets contributing to each metric is reported explicitly in Table B1. Dataset-level AUROC and average precision remained high, with means of 0.996 and 0.988, respectively, while Brier scores were low. The FDR-controlling rule was highly conservative: its median sensitivity was zero, and 120 of the 161 datasets containing true boundaries had 

> 38

Table B1. Additional boundary-probability summaries on held-out simu-lated datasets. Sensitivity, AUROC, and average precision exclude the 39 datasets containing no true boundaries. 

## Metric n Mean SD Median IQR 

## Dataset AUROC 161 0.996 0.005 0.997 0.007 Dataset AP 161 0.988 0.012 0.990 0.020 Dataset Brier score 200 0.061 0.048 0.050 0.047 FDR sensitivity 161 0.169 0.329 0.000 0.004 FDR specificity 200 0.995 0.016 1.000 0.000 Median-probability selected boundaries 200 80.740 80.344 56.500 93.000 True boundaries 200 91.240 93.093 65.500 142.000 Median-probability sensitivity 161 0.719 0.322 0.857 0.537 Median-probability specificity 200 0.962 0.059 0.988 0.050 zero sensitivity under this rule. Its specificity was nevertheless extremely high, with median specificity equal to one. The median-probability rule provided a less conservative operating point. Its mean sensi-tivity was 0.719 and its median sensitivity was 0.857 across datasets containing true bound-aries, while mean specificity remained 0.962 across all datasets. Only 7 of the 161 datasets containing true boundaries had zero sensitivity under the median-probability rule. These results indicate that the median-probability rule recovers substantially more true boundaries than the FDR-controlling rule while retaining strong false-positive control. Fig. B5 provides two complementary diagnostics. The reliability diagram shows that binned posterior boundary probabilities remain reasonably close to empirical boundary fre-quencies over the main mass of the distribution. The dissimilarity-binned panel shows close agreement between mean posterior boundary probability and empirical boundary frequency, indicating that the amortized posterior reproduces the covariate-driven relationship between edge dissimilarity and boundary formation. The threshold-based operating characteristics for the FDR-controlling rule and median-probability rule are shown in Figs. 4 and 5 of the main text. These figures follow the same eligibility convention as Table B1: sensitivity excludes datasets containing no true boundaries, whereas specificity includes all held-out datasets. B.3. Additional posterior predictive diagnostics. Posterior predictive checks were con-ducted on 40 representative held-out datasets spanning the graph-size range, using 100 pos-terior predictive replicates per dataset. For a summary statistic T (y), we report posterior 

> 39

Fig. B5. Boundary-probability diagnostics. Left: reliability diagram for pos-terior boundary probabilities, with point diameter proportional to the number of edges in each probability bin. Right: posterior and empirical boundary frequencies by dissimilarity bin. 

Table B2. Additional posterior predictive summaries on held-out simulated datasets. 

Metric Mean SD Median IQR 

Node-level count coverage (95% PPC interval) 0.940 0.019 0.938 0.025 Moran-type posterior predictive p-value 0.486 0.204 0.520 0.240 Low-dissimilarity edge-contrast p-value 0.536 0.263 0.575 0.423 Mid-dissimilarity edge-contrast p-value 0.489 0.268 0.430 0.450 High-dissimilarity edge-contrast p-value 0.561 0.245 0.600 0.345 predictive p-values, i.e., pppc = Pr  T (yrep ) ≥ T (y) | D , estimated from posterior predictive replicates. Table B2 summarizes the diagnostics. Node-level count coverage was close to nominal, with observed counts falling inside the 95% posterior predictive interval for a mean of 0.940 of areas per dataset. The Moran-type posterior predictive p-values were centered near 0.5, with mean 0.486, indicating no systematic mismatch in residual spatial dependence. For edge-level diagnostics, we considered the residual log-risk contrast ∆ij = log( yi + 0 .5) − log( ei) − log( yj + 0 .5) − log( ej )

for adjacent pairs ( i, j ), averaged within low-, medium-, and high-dissimilarity bins. The corresponding mean posterior predictive p-values were 0.536, 0.489, and 0.561, respectively, suggesting adequate reproduction of local edge contrasts across the dissimilarity spectrum. 

> 40

Fig. B6. Posterior predictive diagnostics for counts, Moran-type summaries, edge contrasts, and the implied number of boundaries. Fig. B6 visualizes marginal count coverage, Moran-type residual spatial dependence, edge contrasts by dissimilarity bin, and the implied number of boundaries. Together, these sum-maries indicate that the amortized posterior predictive distribution reproduces key features of the data-generating model on held-out graphs. B.4. Additional MCMC-DAGAR benchmark diagnostics. This subsection provides additional details for the benchmark comparing ABI-DAGAR with the model-matched MCMC-DAGAR implementation on 100 held-out simulated datasets. The purpose is to assess whether the amortized posterior approximation reproduces the output of a dataset-specific Bayesian sampler under the same thresholded Poisson-DAGAR model. At the parameter level, agreement is strongest for β0, for which the mean absolute dif-ference in posterior means is 0.010 and the posterior-mean correlation is 1.000. Agreement remains strong, though weaker, for the spatial parameters: the mean absolute differences are 0.096 for σ2

> w

, 0.066 for η, and 0.068 for ρ, with corresponding posterior-mean correlations 0.899, 0.846, and 0.927. The corresponding parameter-level graphical comparison is reported in Fig. 7 of the main manuscript. 41 Fig. B7. Additional ABI-DAGAR and MCMC-DAGAR benchmark diagnos-tics. Top: dataset-level boundary-probability and decision metrics. Bottom: runtime comparison across datasets, including elapsed time and the distribu-tion of MCMC-DAGAR/ABI-DAGAR runtime ratios. At the edge level, posterior boundary probabilities from ABI-DAGAR and MCMC-DAGAR have mean correlation 0.920 and mean absolute difference 0.066. Under the median-probability rule, ABI-DAGAR selects 94.48 boundaries on average, compared with 94.47 under MCMC-DAGAR, with a mean of 79.10 shared selected edges and mean Jaccard overlap 0.593. Fig. B7 shows that both methods achieve very strong boundary discrimination, while MCMC-DAGAR attains a lower mean Brier score, 0.041 versus 0.065, and slightly higher mean median-probability sensitivity and specificity, 0.764 and 0.977 versus 0.686 and 0.962 under ABI-DAGAR. Computationally, ABI-DAGAR requires 0.78 seconds per dataset on average to generate 10,000 posterior draws, compared with 2.84 seconds for MCMC-DAGAR. Including the one-time training cost of 5 hours and 45 minutes, however, the break-even point occurs only after roughly 1 .0 × 10 4 datasets. These results support interpreting ABI-DAGAR as a reusable posterior approximation for repeated deployment, rather than as an immediate end-to-end computational saving in a moderate-sized benchmark experiment. 

> 42

Fig. B8. Parameter-specific recovery metrics for the ablation study. Rows correspond to summary representations and columns summarize recovery for 

β0, σ2

> w

, η, and ρ.B.5. Additional ablation-study details. This subsection provides additional details for the ablation study of the summary representation used by the amortized posterior approx-imator. The baseline model used the complete summary design, including core observation features, graph-topology features, dissimilarity-based features, local spatial features, and global graph features. The ablated models removed one block at a time, and an additional reduced model used only the core observation features. For each summary representation, we retrained a separate amortized posterior approximator from scratch using the same net-work architecture and training protocol. All runs were evaluated on the same 4050 held-out datasets, with 50 datasets at each graph size N = 40 , . . . , 120. The full representation gave balanced recovery across parameters, with average MAE across parameters 0.1084, average RMSE 0.1431, empirical 95% coverage 0.9406, and mean correlation 0.7878. Recovery was strongest for β0, with MAE 0.0223 and correlation 0.9986. The boundary parameter η was the most difficult component, with MAE 0.1403 and corre-lation 0.5692, but the baseline gave the strongest η recovery among the compared represen-tations. Fig. B8 summarizes the parameter-specific patterns. The core-observation-only representation shows that marginal information alone is insuffi-cient for the full spatial boundary-detection task. It recovered β0 very well, with MAE 0.0171 and correlation 0.9990, but recovery deteriorated for parameters depending on spatial and boundary structure: the correlation dropped to 0.1717 for η and 0.4643 for ρ. Removing the core observation block produced the largest degradation among the one-block ablations and worsened optimization, with final validation loss increasing from 0.6699 under the full representation to 1.0242. Boundary-detection diagnostics show the same hierarchy. Under the full representation, pooled posterior boundary probabilities achieved AUROC 0.9441, AP 0.7723, and Brier score 

> 43

Fig. B9. Boundary-detection diagnostics across summary representations. The left panel reports pooled boundary-probability metrics, and the right panel reports median-probability decision metrics and boundary-count cov-erage. 

Fig. B10. Training and validation loss trajectories for the baseline and ab-lated summary representations. 0.0738. The core-observation-only model showed the clearest deterioration, with AUROC 0.9013, AP 0.5905, and Brier score 0.0965. By contrast, the one-block non-core ablations remained close to the baseline across pooled AUROC, AP, and Brier score, suggesting that these blocks contribute mainly through refinement and robustness. Fig. B10 reports training and validation loss trajectories. The core-only representation had much larger final training and validation losses, 1.0009 and 1.0395, respectively, while the no-core representation also showed worse optimization behavior, with final losses 0.5619 and 1.0242. The one-block non-core ablations were closer to the baseline. These diagnostics support retaining the full summary design as a stable and interpretable basis for learning posterior inference across heterogeneous areal graphs. 

> 44

Table B3. Computational details for the simulation study. 

Quantity Value 

Hardware Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-10750H CPU @ 2.60GHz Training epochs 100 Batch size 64 Batches per epoch 200 Total training simulations 1,280,000 Training time 5 hours and 45 minutes Held-out validation datasets 200 Posterior draws per dataset 10,000 Validation sampling time (total) 153.59 seconds Validation sampling time (per dataset) 0.77 seconds Validation memory 1.168 GB PPC datasets / PPC draws per dataset 40 / 100 PPC runtime 23.52 seconds B.6. Additional computational details. Table B3 summarizes the computational details of the simulation study. The one-time training stage required 5 hours and 45 minutes on an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-10750H CPU @ 2.60GHz. Validation on the 200 held-out datasets, with 10,000 posterior draws per dataset, required 153.59 seconds in total, corresponding to 0.77 seconds per dataset, with a memory footprint of 1.168 GB. The posterior predic-tive diagnostic block required an additional 23.52 seconds. These timings characterize the deployment profile of the validated amortized posterior approximation after the one-time training stage. 

Appendix C. Additional real data analysis results 

This section reports supplementary diagnostics for the Glasgow and California applica-tions, including posterior predictive checks, fitted-risk comparisons, edge-level boundary di-agnostics, a model-matched MCMC-DAGAR comparison, runtime details, and implemen-tation details. Posterior summaries were based on 100,000 amortized posterior draws, and posterior predictive diagnostics used 1,000 replicates per dataset. C.1. Posterior predictive diagnostics. Fig. C1 reports posterior predictive checks for the two applications. Observed counts are plotted against posterior predictive means with pointwise 95% posterior predictive intervals. These plots are intended as graphical checks of predictive adequacy rather than formal goodness-of-fit tests. In both applications, posterior predictive means track the observed counts reasonably well over most of the range, with wider intervals for larger counts. The Glasgow application 

> 45

Fig. C1. Posterior predictive checks for the real-data applications. Left: Glasgow. Right: California. shows greater spread and more visible departures among the largest observations, whereas the California application lies closer to the 45-degree line for most counties. Overall, the diagnostics suggest that the amortized posterior predictive distribution preserves the main count structure in both datasets, while reflecting greater residual heterogeneity in Glasgow. C.2. Additional fitted-risk comparison. Fig. C2 compares fitted risks from ABI-DAGAR and CARBayes . This comparison is a secondary deployment diagnostic: exact agreement is not expected because the two approaches use different latent spatial priors, and the ABI implementation targets posterior inference for ( β0, σ 2

> w

, η, ρ ) rather than direct posterior sam-pling of the latent field w.For ABI-DAGAR, fitted risks are reconstructed as follows. For each posterior draw of (β0, η, ρ ), we construct the filtered graph implied by η, form an empirical log-residual field from the observed data, smooth this field using the corresponding DAGAR operator, and compute the implied fitted risks. The ABI fitted risk in Fig. C2 is the posterior average of these reconstructed fitted risks. Table C1 reports the corresponding summaries. Fitted-risk correlations are positive in both applications and stronger in California than in Glasgow. The slopes exceeding one indicate that the reconstructed ABI-DAGAR fitted-risk surface varies more strongly over space than the CARBayes surface, especially in Glasgow. Given the reconstructed nature of the ABI-DAGAR fitted risks, these discrepancies should not be interpreted as direct failures of posterior recovery; the edge-level boundary comparison remains the more direct benchmark for the scientific target of interest. 

> 46

Fig. C2. Fitted-risk comparison between ABI-DAGAR and CARBayes . Left: Glasgow. Right: California. 

Table C1. Additional fitted-risk comparison metrics between ABI-DAGAR and CARBayes .

Dataset Correlation MAE RMSE ABI on CB slope ABI on CB intercept 

Glasgow 0.767 0.737 1.110 3.072 −1.261 California 0.843 0.155 0.239 1.765 −0.836 C.3. Additional boundary-probability diagnostics. Fig. C3 plots posterior boundary probability against standardized edge dissimilarity for ABI-DAGAR and CARBayes . These structural diagnostics assess whether posterior boundary probabilities increase with dissim-ilarity, as expected under the localized-smoothing mechanism. The increasing pattern is evident in both datasets, and the two methods track each other closely, with ABI-DAGAR slightly more elevated at larger dissimilarities. Table C2 summarizes the edge-level comparison. Posterior boundary probabilities are highly correlated across methods, and the mean absolute differences are modest. The Jaccard indices of the median-probability boundary sets, 0.739 in Glasgow and 0.727 in California, indicate substantial overlap even though ABI-DAGAR selects additional edges. C.4. Additional comparison with a model-matched MCMC-DAGAR benchmark. 

To complement the external CARBayes benchmark in the main text, we also compared ABI-DAGAR with a model-matched MCMC implementation of the same DAGAR boundary model, denoted MCMC-DAGAR. This comparison separates model-class differences from amortization error: CARBayes provides an established localized-CAR benchmark, whereas MCMC-DAGAR targets the same thresholded Poisson-DAGAR model as ABI-DAGAR. 

> 47

Fig. C3. Posterior boundary probability versus standardized edge dissimilar-ity. Left: Glasgow. Right: California. 

Table C2. Additional boundary-probability comparison metrics between ABI-DAGAR and CARBayes . Here ABI-zij and CB-zij denote the correlation between posterior boundary probability and standardized edge dissimilarity under ABI-DAGAR and CARBayes , respectively. 

Dataset Prob. corr. Prob. MAE ABI-z CB-z ABI CB Shared Jaccard 

Glasgow 0.862 0.123 0.893 0.825 134 99 99 0.739 California 0.863 0.124 0.945 0.868 33 24 24 0.727 Table C3 reports posterior medians and 95% credible intervals. Compared with CARBayes ,the MCMC-DAGAR benchmark already yields broader uncertainty for several spatial pa-rameters, indicating that part of the wider ABI-DAGAR intervals in the main text reflects the DAGAR model class rather than amortization alone. Relative to MCMC-DAGAR, ABI-DAGAR posterior centers are broadly similar, while the amortized intervals remain more diffuse for some latent-structure parameters, especially η. This supports the interpreta-tion used in the main text: ABI-DAGAR recovers the main posterior location but provides conservative scalar uncertainty for the most weakly identified spatial components. The edge-level conclusions are also consistent under the model-matched benchmark. Ta-ble C4 shows high correlations between ABI-DAGAR and MCMC-DAGAR posterior bound-ary probabilities in both datasets. Under the median-probability rule, ABI-DAGAR selects somewhat more boundaries, but all MCMC-DAGAR-selected boundaries are recovered by ABI-DAGAR in both applications. The Jaccard overlap is 0.739 in Glasgow and 0.750 in California, and fitted-risk correlations are positive in both datasets. 

> 48

Table C3. Posterior medians with 95% credible intervals for ABI-DAGAR and the model-matched MCMC-DAGAR benchmark. 

Dataset Parameter ABI-DAGAR MCMC-DAGAR 

Glasgow β0 −0.239 ( −0.309 , −0.171) −0.220 ( −0.241 , −0.199) Glasgow σ2 

> w

0.338 (0 .078 , 1.093) 0.209 (0 .104 , 0.801) Glasgow η 0.832 (0 .116 , 1.137) 0.672 (0 .561 , 0.688) Glasgow ρ 0.878 (0 .453 , 0.975) 0.760 (0 .513 , 0.938) California β0 0.086 (0 .015 , 0.151) 0.091 (0 .073 , 0.109) California σ2 

> w

0.107 (0 .011 , 0.834) 0.030 (0 .016 , 0.108) California η 0.467 (0 .017 , 0.964) 0.439 (0 .258 , 0.725) California ρ 0.817 (0 .051 , 0.989) 0.570 (0 .263 , 0.879) 

Table C4. Agreement between ABI-DAGAR and the model-matched MCMC-DAGAR benchmark.                         

> Dataset Risk corr. Bound. corr. ABI sel. MCMC sel. Shared ABI in MCMC MCMC in ABI Jaccard
> Glasgow 0.775 0.863 134 99 99 73.9 % 100.0 % 0.739 California 0.859 0.845 32 24 24 75.0 % 100.0 % 0.750

Fig. C4. Glasgow (left) and California (right) boundary agreement between ABI-DAGAR and the model-matched MCMC-DAGAR benchmark. Blue in-dicates boundaries selected by both methods, and green ABI-DAGAR-only edges. Fig. C4 maps the selected boundary sets. In both datasets, the additional ABI-DAGAR boundaries appear mainly as local expansions around the same dominant discontinuity struc-ture, rather than as qualitatively different boundary systems. Thus, although ABI-DAGAR remains more diffuse for some scalar spatial parameters, the posterior boundary evidence is closely aligned with the model-matched MCMC-DAGAR benchmark. 

> 49

Table C5. Real-data posterior sampling runtimes for ABI-DAGAR and CARBayes .

Dataset Method Retained draws Runtime 

Glasgow ABI-DAGAR 10,000 ≈ 1 s Glasgow CARBayes , 300k iter., 100k burn-in, thin 20 10,000 615 s Glasgow CARBayes , 20k iter., 10k burn-in, thin 1 10,000 45 s California ABI-DAGAR 10,000 ≈ 1 s California CARBayes , 300k iter., 100k burn-in, thin 20 10,000 395 s California CARBayes , 20k iter., 10k burn-in, thin 1 10,000 30 s This model-matched benchmark clarifies the real-data uncertainty comparison. The nar-rower CARBayes intervals in the main text should not be viewed as a direct uncertainty gold standard for ABI-DAGAR, because CARBayes and DAGAR-based inference use different latent spatial priors and dependence parameterizations. The remaining ABI-versus-MCMC-DAGAR gap is more specifically an amortization effect: the learned posterior approximation is conservative for some weakly identified latent-structure parameters, while preserving pos-terior centers and edge-level boundary conclusions. C.5. Additional real-data runtime comparison. Table C5 reports wall-clock timings for posterior sampling in the two real-data applications. The CARBayes posterior summaries and boundary comparisons reported in the main manuscript were based on 300,000 MCMC iterations, 100,000 burn-in iterations, and thinning by 20, yielding 10,000 retained draws. Under this configuration, CARBayes required 615 seconds for Glasgow and 395 seconds for California. Drawing 10,000 samples from the trained ABI-DAGAR posterior approximation required approximately 1 second per dataset. We also recorded a shorter CARBayes configuration with 20,000 iterations, 10,000 burn-in iterations, and no thinning, which also yields 10,000 retained draws. These shorter runs required 45 seconds for Glasgow and 30 seconds for California, but were used only to contex-tualize computational cost; the posterior summaries and boundary comparisons reported in the main text are based on the longer 300,000-iteration configuration. These timings should therefore be interpreted as deployment costs for already specified analyses, not as substitutes for statistical validation and benchmark comparison. Including the one-time ABI-DAGAR training cost of 5 hours and 45 minutes, the break-even point relative to the main CARBayes configuration is approximately 34 Glasgow-sized analyses or 53 California-sized analyses. Under the shorter CARBayes configuration, the corresponding break-even points are approximately 471 and 714 analyses. Thus, the com-putational advantage of amortization is most relevant for repeated deployment across many related maps, outcomes, or sensitivity analyses. 

> 50

Table C6. High-level neural-network and training configuration for the ABI-DAGAR implementation. 

Component Specification 

Software stack Python 3.10.19; BayesFlow 2.0.8; Keras 3.12.1; TensorFlow 2.21.0 Backend KERAS BACKEND=tensorflow 

Random seed np.random.seed(123) 

Summary network BayesFlow SetTransformer 

Summary output dimension 32 Inference network BayesFlow CouplingFlow 

Transform type Spline Training mode Online simulation Epochs 100 Batch size 64 Batches per epoch 200 Total simulated datasets seen in training 1,280 ,000 Hardware Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-10750H CPU @ 2.60GHz Training time 5 hours and 45 minutes C.6. Neural-network implementation and reproducibility details. The amortized posterior approximation was implemented in Python using BayesFlow with Keras on the Ten-sorFlow backend. The training notebook sets KERAS BACKEND=tensorflow . The recorded environment used Python 3.10.19, BayesFlow 2.0.8, Keras 3.12.1, and TensorFlow 2.21.0. Randomness was controlled through np.random.seed(123) in the notebook; no separate TensorFlow or Keras seeds were specified. The summary network was a BayesFlow SetTransformer with a 32-dimensional out-put representation, and the inference network was a BayesFlow CouplingFlow with spline transforms. Both inference variables and summary variables were standardized within the BayesFlow workflow. Training was performed online for 100 epochs with batch size 64 and 200 batches per epoch, corresponding to 1 ,280 ,000 simulated datasets. No user-defined callbacks, early stopping, or custom learning-rate schedule were specified, and BayesFlow’s default online-training optimizer was used. Table C6 summarizes the implementation details.