Title: 9235_Effortless_Simulation_Eff.pdf

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=kN0YHWGDPH

Number of Pages: 40

Markdown Content:
# Effortless, Simulation-Efficient Bayesian Inference using Tabular Foundation Models 

Julius Vetter 1,2 * Manuel Gloeckler 1,2 * Daniel Gedon 1,2 † Jakob H. Macke 1,2,3 †

> 1

Machine Learning in Science, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany 

> 2

Tübingen AI Center, Tübingen, Germany 

> 3

Department Empirical Inference, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 

# Abstract 

Simulation-based inference (SBI) offers a flexible and general approach to per-forming Bayesian inference: In SBI, a neural network is trained on synthetic data simulated from a model and used to rapidly infer posterior distributions for observed data. A key goal for SBI is to achieve accurate inference with as few simulations as possible, especially for expensive simulators. In this work, we address this challenge by repurposing recent probabilistic foundation models for tabular data: We show how tabular foundation models—specifically TabPFN—can be used as pre-trained autoregressive conditional density estimators for SBI. We propose Neural Posterior Estimation with Prior-data Fitted Networks (NPE-PFN) and show that it is competitive with current SBI approaches in terms of accuracy for both benchmark tasks and two complex scientific inverse problems. Crucially, it often substantially outperforms them in terms of simulation efficiency, sometimes requiring orders of magnitude fewer simulations. NPE-PFN eliminates the need for selecting and training an inference network and tuning its hyperparameters. We also show that it exhibits superior robustness to model misspecification and can be scaled to simulation budgets that exceed the context size limit of TabPFN. NPE-PFN provides a new direction for SBI, where training-free, general-purpose inference models offer efficient, easy-to-use, and flexible solutions for a wide range of stochastic inverse problems. 

# 1 Introduction 

Simulation has long been a cornerstone of scientific inquiry [ 1 , 2 ] and is becoming increasingly relevant as researchers tackle ever more complex scientific questions and systems [ 3]. Simulators often depend on parameters that are challenging or impossible to measure experimentally. Bayesian inference provides a general framework for identifying such parameters by estimating posterior distributions over parameters. However, classical methods such as Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) require evaluations of the associated model likelihoods, which can be computationally demanding or prohibitive for complex numerical simulators. The field of simulation-based inference (SBI), or likelihood-free inference, aims to address this challenge by enabling Bayesian inference without requiring access to likelihoods. The basic idea 

> *

Equal contribution. 

> †

Joint supervision. 

{firstname.lastname}@uni-tuebingen.de 

Code available at https://github.com/mackelab/npe-pfn .39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025). of SBI is to train a neural network on synthetic data simulated from the model such that it can approximate the posterior distributions. In Neural Posterior Estimation (NPE, [ 4 , 5]), a conditional density neural network—often, a normalizing flow [ 6, 7] or a diffusion model [ 8– 10 ]—learns the conditional distribution of parameters given simulated data p(θ | x). When evaluated on empirical observations xo, the network directly returns the posterior distribution p(θ | xo). Similarly, other SBI methods use neural networks to represent likelihoods [ 11 – 13 ], likelihood ratios [ 14 – 17 ], or target several properties at once [ 18 – 21 ]. SBI has been used for scientific discovery in various domains, including astrophysics [22] and neuroscience [23]. Compared to classical Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC, [ 24 , 25 ]) or synthetic likelihoods methods [ 26 ], neural-network-based SBI methods scale better to complex, high-dimensional simu-lators [ 27 ]. In addition, SBI methods often amortize the computational burden: Once trained, the network provides fast inference across multiple observations. Despite these advances, a key challenge for SBI methods remains: They typically require generating a large number of simulations as synthetic training data, rendering them impractical for expensive simulators. Recent work aims to increase simulation efficiency, e.g., by exploiting additional information or properties of the simulator [ 7, 28 – 31 ], utilizing low-fidelity simulations [ 32 , 33 ], or using Bayesian neural networks [ 34 –36 ]. So-called sequential approaches forego the amortization properties of the inference network and target simulations to particular observations [ 4 – 6, 37 ], but even then, simulation efficiency remains a challenge. In addition, users must select an appropriate SBI method and select and train an inference network with the associated hyperparameters—posing a barrier for inexperienced users. NPE-PFN NPE   

> prior simulation simulation dataset direct posterior Training Evaluate filter autoregressive posterior Evaluate ... ... ...

Figure 1: Comparison of NPE to NPE-PFN (ours): Both approaches use simulations sampled from the prior and simulator. In (standard) NPE, a neu-ral density estimator is trained to obtain the pos-terior. In NPE-PFN, the posterior is evaluated by autoregressively passing the simulation dataset and observations to TabPFN. These limitations raise a key question: Can we eliminate the high cost associated with train-ing and tuning, and alleviate the need to have a large number of simulations by leveraging re-cent advances in foundation models? Here, we answer this question by repurposing a tabular foundation model—specifically Tabular Prior-data Fitted Networks v2 (TabPFN) [ 38 ]—as an inference engine for SBI. TabPFN is trained to perform in-context learning on tabular data (i.e., structured data organized in rows and columns), returning a prediction when being prompted with a training dataset and a test point. For both regression and classification, TabPFN was shown to perform exceptionally well, in particu-lar in low data regimes. Crucially, TabPFN can also serve as a density estimator by applying it in an autoregressive manner, though prior work has only explored this in limited settings [38]. Here, we show that using TabPFN autoregres-sively allows for the estimation of complex, high-dimensional conditional densities, making it suitable for SBI. Based on this observation, we introduce Neural Posterior Estimation with Prior-data Fitted Networks (NPE-PFN), a vari-ant of NPE that uses TabPFN as a pre-trained conditional density estimator, and therefore en-ables inference without any additional neural network training (Fig. 1). On benchmark tasks, NPE-PFN performs competitively with other SBI approaches and often outperforms them substan-tially, especially for small simulation budgets. Furthermore, we leverage data-filtering schemes that enable NPE-PFN to make use of large simulation budgets exceeding the context size of TabPFN and extend the approach to sequential inference settings. Finally, we show that NPE-PFN remains empiri-cally robust under model misspecification and achieves strong results on two challenging scientific applications, requiring orders of magnitude fewer simulations than standard SBI approaches. 22 Neural Posterior Estimation with Prior-data Fitted Networks 

2.1 Background 

We consider a simulator with parameters θ ∈ Rdθ that stochastically generates samples x ∈ Rdx ,thus implicitly defining a likelihood p(x | θ). Given a prior distribution p(θ) and observation xo,our aim is to infer the associated posterior distribution p(θ | xo) ∝ p(xo | θ)p(θ).

Simulation-based inference. We focus on Neural Posterior Estimation (NPE), a common approach to SBI: NPE approximates the target posterior distribution directly by training an inference network 

qϕ(θ | x) on a dataset of parameter–data pairs D = {(θi, xi)}Ni=1 sampled from a prior p(θ) and a simulator with implicit likelihood p(x | θ). The inference network is trained to maximize the log-likelihood and learns to approximate the corresponding posterior distribution [ 4 , 39 ]. Flexible conditional neural density estimators, such as normalizing flows [ 40 – 42 ], are typically used as inference networks. At inference time, NPE provides an amortized posterior approximation, allowing for rapid evaluations. 

Tabular foundation models. Recent foundation models for tabular data have shown strong per-formance on regression and classification tasks via in-context learning, in which predictions for new inputs are made by conditioning the model on a context dataset [ 43 ]. We focus on Prior-data Fitted Networks (PFNs) [ 44 , 45 ], specifically TabPFN [ 38 ], a state-of-the-art transformer-based PFN foundation model [ 46 ] for probabilistic classification and regression on tabular data. It has been pre-trained on synthetic datasets {(yi, xi)}Mi=0 with up to M = 2048 samples from randomly generated structural causal models by maximizing the likelihood qψ (y0 | x0, T ), where T = {(yi, xi)}Mi=1 

is the in-context dataset. After training, TabPFN has been tested to perform well up to a feature dimension of dx ≤ 500 and a context size of N ≤ 10 4 [38]. At inference, TabPFN conditions on a given in-context dataset T ′ and test point xo to estimate the distribution p(y | xo) ≈ qψ (y | xo, T ′) over the target variable y. Importantly, in its basic version, TabPFN is limited to univariate targets ( y ∈ R for regression, y ∈ { 1, . . . , n } for classifica-tion). Thus, TabPFN is an in-context density estimator for one-dimensional densities. We perform inference over a model parameter θ ∈ R by setting y = θ to estimate the posterior distribution 

p(θ | xo) ≈ qψ (θ | xo, D) given an observation xo and a dataset of simulations D. However, to estimate full posterior distributions over multiple model parameters θ ∈ Rdθ , conditional density estimation in high dimensions is required. 

2.2 TabPFN for simulation-based inference 

To perform simulation-based inference with TabPFN, we repurpose it as a general conditional density estimator. The key to estimating high-dimensional densities with TabPFN is to use it autoregressively, i.e., to use it to sequentially predict the next dimension of the data with the previously processed dimensions and covariates in context. In SBI, given a prior p(θ) and simulator p(x | θ), the multivariate posterior distribution p(θ | xo)

for observation xo can be decomposed as 

p(θ | xo) ≈

> dθ

Y

> j=1

qψ (θj | θ<j , xo, D<j )

where D<j = {θji , [θ<j i , xi]} with <j denoting the vector from index 1 up to, but not including j.Thus, using an arbitrary but fixed order of the parameter dimensions, one evaluation of the posterior 

p(θ | xo) requires dθ evaluations of TabPFN, making the prediction more expensive as the dimension-ality increases. However, unlike standard NPE methods, this approach bypasses model fitting entirely and directly evaluates the posterior. We refer to our proposed approach as NPE-PFN, in contrast to standard NPE, which requires training an inference network, e.g., a normalizing flow (Fig. 1, pseudocode for NPE-PFN in Appendix Alg. 1). 

2.3 Increasing the effective context size 

Standard NPE can approximate arbitrarily complex conditional densities, given enough simulations and a sufficiently expressive inference network [ 4]. In contrast, NPE-PFN is limited by TabPFN’s 3context size of approximately 10 4 samples, beyond which additional data yields diminishing perfor-mance gains. While we expect NPE-PFN to be particularly powerful for small simulation counts, it is nevertheless desirable to also be able to work with larger simulation budgets using in-context learning. 

Filtering simulations based on relevance. To overcome the limited context size, previous work proposed to use a subset of the training data containing only the nearest neighbors of a given test point as the context dataset [ 47 ]. Here, we show that this procedure, and generalizations of it, are sound from a Bayesian perspective when estimating the full posterior distribution. To this end, we exploit a key property of (neural) posterior estimation: The posterior can be estimated using only samples that are very close to the observation xo. More specifically, for any non-negative function fxo that satisfies fxo (xo) > 0, we can reweigh the joint distribution p(x, θ)fxo (x) without affecting the posterior distribution at convergence (details in Appendix Sec. B.2). This property allows us to filter simulations based on relevance without biasing the estimation. Choosing the filter as fxo (x) = I(d(x, xo) < ϵ ), where d(·, ·) is a suitable distance metric and ϵ > 0 is a threshold, effectively recovers an ABC-like selection scheme, where only simulations close to xo are retained. In practice, ϵ is set adaptively to include the Nfilter closest simulations, ensuring that the full context is used. Here, we consider the Euclidean distance d(xo, x) = ∥x − xo∥2 after standardizing each feature dimension. As noted above, this filtering based on nearest neighbors has previously been explored and is also referred to as localization or retrieval [ 47 – 49 ]. This filtering principle also underlies various SBI methods, such as the aforementioned ABC [ 24 ] or calibration kernels in NPE training [5]. Filtering for simulations that are relevant or close to a given observation makes the (context) dataset dependent on that observation. For classical SBI methods, this step would require re-training the density estimator for each new observation, thus breaking amortization. However, NPE-PFN remains amortized: Since it is training-free, inference for new observations requires only a computationally negligible filtering step over a fixed set of simulations. Finally, filtering only works for conditional 

density estimation problems such as (simulation-based) Bayesian inference, which is our focus here. However, we also show how (Appendix Sec. B.4) this approach can be extended to unconditional 

density estimation on a larger number of samples. In the unconditional case, we partition the data space into regions that can be solved with local contexts. 

Embedding data. Similarly to context size, the feature size can be a limitation, particularly for high-dimensional observations. This limitation can be handled either by performing inference using human-crafted summary statistics (as commonly done in ABC) or using (pre-trained) embedding networks [ 5 , 50 ]. In principle, NPE-PFN allows for training an embedding network end-to-end (e.g., [ 51 ] in the context of classification), but we here investigate pre-training an embedding network independently of the density estimator (Appendix Sec. B.3). 

2.4 Truncated sequential NPE-PFN 

To reduce the number of simulations, sequential SBI methods have been developed that acquire simulations adaptively in rounds for one observation xo. We focus on Truncated Sequential NPE (TSNPE) [ 37 ], which mitigates bias by exploiting the (approximate) invariance of the posterior under modifications outside of its high-density regions (HDR). Formally, let HDR 1−αp := {θ | p(θ | xo) >kα}, where kα denotes the density threshold containing α% of the probability mass. Then, given a truncated prior ˜p(θ) = I(θ ∈ HDR 1−αp )p(θ), the posterior will be approximately preserved for xo.In TSNPE, a density estimator is trained in rounds. Starting with the full prior in the first round, the trained posterior approximation q(θ | xo) is used to estimate HDR 1−αp ≈ HDR 1−αq and to truncate the prior to the HDR of the posterior approximation for the next round. In each subsequent round, the newly truncated prior is used to generate new simulations adaptively and refine q(θ | xo) through continued training. Notably, training becomes redundant by replacing the density estimator with the TabPFN regressor, to which we will refer as TSNPE-PFN. In this training-free setting, the main computational burden shifts to truncating the prior distribution. Prior truncation can be achieved either by approximate approaches, such as sampling-importance resampling, or exactly by rejection sampling from the prior, i.e., checking whether a prior sample falls within the HDR. However, the latter approach requires repeated density estimation with the TabPFN regressor to evaluate q(θ | xo),which can be costly to do autoregressively, a problem we address next. 410 2 10 3 10 4 10 5Num. sim. 0.5 1.0 C2ST                                  

> Gauss. Linear Gauss. Mixture Two Moons SLCP Bernoulli GLM SIR Lotka Volterra
> NPE NLE NPE-PFN (unfiltered) NPE-PFN 10 210 310 410 5Num. sim. 10 −110 110 310 5Time [s] Sampling time Training time 10 210 310 410 5Num. sim. 0.5 1.0 C2ST
> Two Moons SLCP Bernoulli GLM SIR Lotka Volterra
> TSNPE SNLE TSNPE-PFN

## ab cno training Figure 2: SBI benchmark results for amortized and sequential NPE-PFN. (a) C2ST for NPE, NLE, and NPE-PFN across ten reference posteriors (lower is better); dots indicate averages and bars show 95% confidence intervals over five independent runs. (b) Average time to generate 10 4 posterior samples and (if applicable) training time. (c) C2ST for sequential methods. For rejection sampling, we need to evaluate q(θ | xo) for a large number of prior samples θ ∼ p(θ).In practice, the posterior is often much narrower than the prior and a large percentage of these samples will be rejected. This high rejection rate necessitates a fast, approximate approach for density evaluation, which we will construct using the “ratio-trick” [ 52 ]. We first sample an initial set of posterior samples {θi}i from the NPE-PFN posterior once and assign these samples the class label 

y = 1 . We then contrast these samples with samples from a uniform distribution U(θ; θmin , θmax )

to which we assign the class label y = 0 . The Bayes optimal classifier for this classification problem is given by 

Pxo (y = 1 | θ) = p(θ | xo)

p(θ | xo) + U(θ; θmin , θmax ) , thus, p(θ | xo) = Pxo (y = 1 | θ)1 − Pxo (y = 1 | θ) ,

within the bounds θmin , θmax . After autoregressively sampling from the desired posterior to construct the training dataset, this approach, which we will refer to as ratio-based density evaluation, requires only a single forward pass using the TabPFN classifier and is, therefore, significantly faster than autoregressive density evaluation, especially as the parameter dimension dθ or the number of required density evaluations grows (pseudocode for TSNPE-PFN in Appendix Alg. 2). 

# 3 Experiments 

To assess NPE-PFN, we conduct experiments on synthetic SBI benchmark tasks and real data, cover-ing scenarios from low to high-dimensional data and including cases with model misspecification. 

3.1 Amortized and sequential benchmark performance 

We evaluate NPE-PFN on various tasks from the SBI benchmark [ 27 ], which provides ground truth posterior samples for 10 observations for each task. We measure posterior sample quality using the classifier two-sample test (C2ST, 53 ). A C2ST accuracy of 0.5 indicates that the approximate posterior exactly matches the ground truth posterior, as the classifier fails to distinguish between the two sample sets. In contrast, an accuracy of 1.0 reflects a strong mismatch between the estimated and true posterior. As baselines, we compare against flow-based NPE and NLE provided by the SBI library [ 54 , 55 ]. For sequential baselines, we use truncated sequential NPE (TSNPE [ 37 ]) and sequential NLE (SNLE [ 11 ]). Posterior estimates are computed across four simulation budgets, ranging from 10 2 to 10 5 simulations. Beyond 10 4 simulations, NPE-PFN incorporates filtering, whereas an alternative unfiltered variant, denoted NPE-PFN (unfiltered) , extends the context size beyond the TabPFN-recommended limit. For budgets ≤ 10 4, both variants are identical. 

Amortized inference. For 10 2 simulations, NPE-PFN substantially outperforms NLE and NPE on all but one task (Fig. 2a,b). For 10 3 or 10 4 simulations, NPE-PFN is generally competitive, with 5the exception of a few tasks where some baselines outperform it. For example, NLE outperforms NPE-PFN on the simple-likelihood-complex-posterior (SLCP) task, as NPE-PFN, like NPE, directly targets the posterior instead of the simpler likelihood. However, NPE-PFN performs substantially better than both baselines on tasks such as SIR or Lotka-Volterra for all simulation budgets. With 

10 5 simulations, the difference between NPE-PFN and its unfiltered variant becomes evident. The extended context does not improve performance for larger simulation budgets, while the filtered NPE-PFN variant achieves significantly better C2ST accuracies, matching or surpassing the baselines. While NPE-PFN is training-free, inference speed depends on the number of simulations, and the dimensionality of the parameter and observation spaces. For the benchmark tasks, we observe an inference speed that is comparable to NLE (Fig. 2b), but orders of magnitude slower than NPE, which is near-instantaneous. We perform a careful analysis of the inference speed of NPE-PFN across all relevant variables for users to make an informed decision in their respective application (Appendix Sec. D.3, Tab. D-2). The advantage of NPE-PFN over baseline methods remains for other tasks outside the SBI benchmark suite (Appendix Sec. D.1, Fig. D-1), as well as compared to other baseline methods such as NRE, NPE ensembles (Appendix Sec. D.2, Fig. D-2), and even when performing extensive hyperparameter optimization for NPE (Appendix Fig. D-4). Furthermore, NPE-PFN posterior estimates are well-calibrated (Fig. D-3). In cases where data dimension dx outgrows the supported feature dimension and learned summary statistics are required, the end-to-end trained NPE, however, outperforms NPE-PFN with indepen-dently pre-trained summary statistics (Appendix Sec. D.4, Fig. D-5). In addition, we ablate the effect of the filter size indicating that the default size is (close to) optimal for all considered tasks (Appendix Sec. D.6, Fig. D-7). Finally, we vary the autoregressive order, in which the parameter dimensions are sampled, and find no noticeable effect compared to the default order (Appendix Sec. D.8). 

Sequential inference. We adapt the setup in Deistler et al. [37] to evaluate TSNPE-PFN. Rejection sampling is performed using the fast, approximate ratio-based densities (Sec. 2.4, Appendix Sec. D.5, Fig. D-6 for a comparison between autoregressive and ratio-based density evaluation). We equally divide the simulation budget into 10 rounds, with proposals truncated to the 1 − ε highest density re-gion, where ε = 10 −3. TSNPE-PFN excels with small simulation budgets (Fig. 2c). On the SIR task, it reaches close to optimal C2ST accuracy with only 10 2 simulations. At larger budgets, TSNPE-PFN maintains a strong performance, particularly on the Lokta-Volterra task, which is highly challenging for other SBI methods. TSNPE-PFN benefits from NPE-PFN’s ability to generate high-quality poste-rior estimates with few simulations, allowing it to acquire more relevant simulations in early rounds. 0 5             

> μ(mean) m05
> τ (scale) m
> 05
> μ(mean) m
> 01
> λ(fraction) m05
> τ (scale) m
> 01
> λ(fraction) m
> 05
> μ(mean) m
> 01
> λ(fraction) m
> 0.50 0.75 1.00 C2ST
> −0.2 0.0 0.2
> ΔC2ST NPE-PFN NPE ∆(NPE-PFN; NPE) Prior miss. Likelihood miss.

Figure 3: Robustness under misspecification. 

C2ST against a well-specified ground truth pos-terior. The red star marks the well-specified model. Rows: Prior and likelihood misspecification. 

Columns: NPE, NPE-PFN, and their difference in terms of C2ST accuracy (darker blue indicates that NPE-PFN is better). 

Summary. NPE-PFN provides accurate poste-rior estimates, especially for small simulation budgets. With filtering, NPE-PFN is also com-petitive for larger simulation budgets. As an in-context learning method, it requires no train-ing on specific simulations and offers inference speeds comparable to other baselines, though runtime scales with the number of simulations and the dimensionality of the parameters and observations. This flexibility makes NPE-PFN applicable to a wide range of setups and sim-ulators. We observe NPE-PFN performs par-ticularly well in tasks with underlying graphi-cal structure and conditional (in-)dependencies, which are similar to the structural causal mod-els used in TabPFN’s pre-training. In addi-tion to posterior estimation with NPE-PFN, we evaluate the unconditional high-dimensional density estimation capabilities of TabPFN on UCI datasets [ 56 ], showing that it is more data-efficient than a neural spline flow (Appendix Sec. D.9, Fig. D-10). 6Real observations                                 

> TSNPE-PFN predictives
> TSNPE predictives 10 310 4Number of simulations 012dist. to obs.  real obs. 10 310 4Number of simulations
> synthetic obs. TSNPE TSNPE-PFN 01α
> 01ECP
> 10 sim. 301α
> 10 sim. 401α
> 10 sim. 5NPE NPE-PFN 080 gNa 015 gK0.00 0.05 gl0.0 0.6 gM
> 50 3000 τmax 40 90 VT
> 0.0 0.2 σ35 100 El

## ca bdFigure 4: Posterior inference for observations from the Allen cell type database. (a) Average distance to observation in standardized space of summary statistics for both the real and synthetic ob-servations. (b) Posterior predictive simulations for real observations using TSNPE-PFN and TSNPE. 

(c) Posterior marginals for one synthetic observation; TSNPE-PFN marginals are substantially more constrained for several parameters. (d) Simulation-based calibration for NPE-PFN and NPE on the HH simulator. 

3.2 Impact of misspecification 

To investigate how NPE-PFN handles misspecification, we use the 2D Gaussian means misspecifica-tion benchmark from Schmitt et al. [57] , considering both prior and likelihood misspecification. The ground truth is given by the prior μ ∼ N (0, I) and likelihood xi ∼ N (μ, I). Prior misspecification uses the prior μ ∼ N (μm, τ mI) while keeping the true likelihood; Likelihood misspecification uses the true prior with the likelihood xi ∼ λmBeta (2 , 5) + (1 − λm)N (μ, τ mI), where τm ∈ R+,

λm ∈ [0 , 1] . We evaluate the C2ST of predicted posteriors against the reference posterior distribution of the well-specified data using 10 2 simulations (details in Appendix Sec. 3.2). Both NPE-PFN and NPE degrade as the level of misspecification increases, with prior misspecification leading to more severe performance degradation than likelihood misspecification (Fig. 3). However, NPE-PFN achieves better C2ST values than NPE across a broader range of misspecification levels. In addition, NPE-PFN remains insensitive to various feature and noise distributions (Appendix Sec. D.7, Fig. D-8). Finally, we find that the performance of NPE-PFN on the SBI benchmark tasks is invariant to the choice of the autoregressive order (Appendix Sec. D.8, Fig. D-9). Thus, the trend observed in the SBI benchmark extends to these simple but misspecified tasks, on which NPE-PFN also consistently outperforms NPE. Next, we evaluated whether this performance gap also holds for scientific tasks with real data, on which the simulator is potentially misspecified. 

3.3 Single-Compartment Hodgkin-Huxley Model 

We evaluate the performance of (TS)NPE-PFN on a challenging inference task, considering the Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) simulator of single-neural voltage dynamics [ 58 , 59 ]. Following Gonçalves et al. [60] , the simulator has eight parameters and seven summary statistics based on the voltage trace. We infer posteriors for 10 real observations from the Allen cell type database [ 61 ], for which inference is known to be challenging [ 62 –64 ]. We evaluate inference quality via posterior predictives and the average Euclidean distance between predictives and real observations in a standardized summary statistics space. In addition, for each real observation, we create an associated synthetic, and therefore well-specified observation, where the ground truth parameter is known, allowing for direct comparison between inferred posteriors and true values. TSNPE-PFN yields posterior predictives that closely match real observations with a simulation budget of 10 4 (Fig. 4a,b). It outperforms TSNPE, which struggles to produce realistic predictives, especially at smaller budgets. For synthetic observations , TSNPE-PFN again achieves better predictive accuracy 7with fewer simulations, with the average distance approaching zero for a simulation budget of 10 4. In parameter space, TSNPE-PFN posteriors are tightly concentrated around the true parameters, with significant improvement over TSNPE (Fig. 4c). In the amortized setting , NPE-PFN shows good calibration for 10 3 and 10 5 simulations but is slightly overconfident for 10 4 (Fig. 4d). However, (TS)NPE-PFN achieves significantly better prediction quality and yields tight posteriors around the true parameters, making it more sensitive to miscalibration. These results demonstrate TSNPE-PFN’s superior simulation efficiency, achieving the same predictive quality as TSNPE with an order of magnitude fewer simulations. This efficiency makes TSNPE-PFN particularly well-suited for inference with real, potentially misspecified simulators under limited simulation budgets. 

3.4 Pyloric Network Model 

Finally, we evaluate TSNPE-PFN on a high-dimensional simulator of the pyloric network in the stomatogastric ganglion (STG) of the crab Cancer Borealis , a well-studied circuit generating rhythmic activity [ 60 , 65 , 66 ]. This model consists of three neurons, each with eight membrane conductances, interconnected by seven synapses, resulting in a 31-dimensional parameter space. The simulated voltage traces are summarized using 15 established statistics. A key challenge in this setting is the extreme sparsity of valid simulations. Specifically, 99% of parameter samples from the prior yield implausible voltage traces, preventing the computation of summary statistics [67]. For this reason, earlier work relied on millions of simulations for an amortized NPE-based posterior approximation (18 million in Gonçalves et al. [60] ). The simulation count could later be reduced by restricting the prior to valid simulation using an additional classifier [ 67 ]. In addition, several sequential algorithms have been developed to address this problem [ 18 , 37 , 68 ], the latest of which achieves good posterior predictives using 1.5 · 10 5 simulations. 0.1 1.0 dist. to obs. 

> SNVI S-UNLE TSNPE TSNPE-PFN

a b   

> 550 150 Sim. (x10³) 050 100 % valid
> 0.0 2.5 Time [s] measurement PY LP AB/PD  PY LP AB/PD posterior predictive

Figure 5: Results on the pyloric simulator. (a) Voltage traces from the experimental mea-surement (top) and a posterior predictive sim-ulated using the posterior mean from TSNPE-PFN as the parameter (bottom). (b) Average distance (energy scoring rule) to observation and percentage of valid simulation from pos-terior samples; compared to experimental re-sults obtained in Glaser et al. [68]. To perform sequential inference on the pyloric net-work with TSNPE-PFN, we use a restricted prior based on the TabPFN classifier. Due to the high dimensionality of the parameter space, rejection sam-pling is prohibitive. Therefore, we use sampling im-portance resampling with an oversampling factor of 10. In the first round, we use 5 · 10 3 simulations and run TSNPE-PFN for 45 rounds, adding 10 3 simu-lations per round for a total of 5 · 10 4 simulations (details in Appendix Sec. C.4). The generated voltage traces from posterior mean esti-mates of TSNPE-PFN closely resemble true measure-ments (Fig. 5). With more than 50% valid simulations at just 5 · 10 3 simulations and approximately 99% va-lidity for fewer than 5 · 10 4 simulations, TSNPE-PFN outperforms all comparison methods, which either required substantially larger simulation budgets to reach comparable performance or did not reach it at all. Furthermore, the autoregressive evaluation or-der again has no noticeable effect on the resulting performance (Appendix Sec. C.4). Our results demonstrate that TSNPE-PFN can infer posteriors with substantially improved simulation ef-ficiency, making it a powerful approach for complex high-dimensional models with a limited simulation budget. 

# 4 Discussion 

We have shown here that pre-trained foundation models—specifically, TabPFN—can be effectively repurposed to perform accurate training-free simulation-based inference. Together with autoregressive 8sampling for high-dimensional posterior distributions, filtering to increase context size, and fast density evaluation using the density ratio, NPE-PFN provides a flexible inference method that can be effortlessly applied to many different inference tasks. Across several benchmarks and two real-world tasks, NPE-PFN consistently estimates accurate posteriors with particularly strong results for small simulation budgets, often requiring orders of magnitude fewer simulations than existing SBI methods. These results establish foundation models and in-context learning as a promising direction for training-free inference in scientific applications. 

Related work. Our work relates to meta-learning [ 69 ], where models generalize across tasks by acquiring shared inductive biases. Meta learning has been applied to amortized (Bayesian) inference [ 70 , 71 ]. More specifically, however, NPE-PFN is an instance of in-context learning (ICL), where task adaptation is achieved solely by conditioning pre-trained models on different inputs [ 43 ]. ICL was popularized by LLMs [ 72 ], but its scope has expanded beyond language, with work showing that transformers can learn various function classes in context [ 73 , 74 ] and work introducing prior fitted networks [ 38 , 44 , 45 ]. NPE-PFN extends this direction by enabling ICL for simulation-based Bayesian inference. We note that this does not require training the inference networks on any SBI tasks, but rather works well using an “off-the-shelf” model trained for classification and regression. In addition to NPE-PFN, multiple methods have been proposed to perform ICL for Bayesian inference [75 –77 ]. These approaches parameterize posteriors using, for example, Gaussians, flows, or mixtures and require fixed input and parameter dimensionality and, to date, are only trained on a specific, limited class of probabilistic models. In contrast, NPE-PFN leverages autoregressive modeling over parameter dimensions, enabling zero-shot generalization without retraining across inference problems with varying shapes. Finally, several works have proposed extensions for TabPFN beyond its original setting, targeting new data modalities, larger context sizes, or higher-dimensional features. To address TabPFN’s limited context size, retrieval-based approaches select informative subsets of the training data [ 47 –49 , 78 ], including nearest-neighbor-based filtering [ 47 – 49 ], which we adapt in NPE-PFN for Bayesian inference. Crucially, we demonstrate that this filtering does not bias the posterior, as the filter step can be interpreted as a calibration kernel [ 5 ]. Other strategies include data distillation [ 79 , 80 ], boosting weak learners [ 81 ], feature-wise ensembling [ 82 ], encoders and bagging [ 51 ], as well as non-autoregressive extensions to time series forecasting [ 83 ] and tabular data generation [ 84 ]. TabICL [ 85 ] proposes architectural changes to scale to datasets with over 10 5 points. NPE-PFN departs from these approaches by repurposing TabPFN for posterior inference through filtering and fast evaluation of densities. 

Limitations. While NPE-PFN eliminates the need for simulation-specific training, it inherits proper-ties of TabPFN. TabPFN has a soft limit in maximum feature size ( ≤ 500 ) and context length ( ≤ 10 4). We present methods to overcome these limitations, i.e, filtering and embedding nets. However, as the number of simulations and the need for density evaluations increase, the performance advantage of NPE-PFN over standard methods such as NPE diminishes. Furthermore, while embedding networks allow NPE-PFN to be used for high-dimensional observations, they require separate pre-training. In addition, modeling high-dimensional parameter spaces beyond TabPFN’s maximum feature size of 500 dimensions remains challenging. Finally, like other in-context methods, NPE-PFN is more ex-pensive than flow-based NPE, a challenge exacerbated by the autoregressive estimation of posteriors. However, unlike other in-context methods for Bayesian inference, NPE-PFN does not require training and hyperparameter tuning, making it suitable for exploratory workflows or non-expert users. In addition, by requiring substantially fewer simulations, NPE-PFN accelerates the overall SBI workflow. Thus, while we expect NPE-PFN to be particularly useful for exploratory workflows or expensive simulators, inference methods based on trained density estimators might still be advantageous in settings where large numbers of simulations are available, or where bespoke embedding networks and fast sampling are required, such as in some applications in astrophysics [ 22 ]. An interesting direction for future work is to transfer NPE-PFN’s advantages to existing, faster inference techniques (e.g., via student–teacher distillation). 

Conclusion. We presented NPE-PFN, a method that repurposes the tabular foundation model TabPFN for training-free simulation-based Bayesian inference. NPE-PFN is competitive with—and often outperforms—existing methods, especially for small simulation budgets. NPE-PFN is a simple-to-use and simulation-efficient tool for SBI, with the potential to become the go-to method for novice users, exploratory workflows, and applications with constrained simulation budgets. 9Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding 

We thank Michael Deistler and Katharina Eggensperger for feedback on the manuscript, specifically Michael Deistler for suggesting to filter simulations and Jonas Beck for the implementation of the pyloric simulator. We thank all members of the Mackelab for discussions and feedback on the manuscript. This work was funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy – EXC number 2064/1 – 390727645 and SFB 1233 ‘Robust Vision’ (276693517), the European Union (ERC, DeepCoMechTome, 101089288), the “Certification and Foundations of Safe Machine Learning Systems in Healthcare” project funded by the Carl Zeiss Foundation and the Boehringer Ingelheim AI & Data Science Fellowship Program. JV and MG are members of the International Max Planck Research School for Intelligent Systems (IMPRS-IS). 

# References 

[1] Eric Winsberg. Science in the age of computer simulation . University of Chicago Press, 2019. [2] Benjamin Skuse. The third pillar. Physics World , 32(3):40–43, 2019. [3] Alexander Lavin, David Krakauer, Hector Zenil, Justin Gottschlich, Tim Mattson, Johann Brehmer, Anima Anandkumar, Sanjay Choudry, Kamil Rocki, Atılım Güne¸ s Baydin, Carina Prunkl, Brooks Paige, Olexandr Isayev, Erik Peterson, Peter L. McMahon, Jakob Macke, Kyle Cranmer, Jiaxin Zhang, Haruko Wainwright, Adi Hanuka, Manuela Veloso, Samuel Assefa, Stephan Zheng, and Avi Pfeffer. Simulation intelligence: Towards a new generation of scientific methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.03235 , 2022. [4] George Papamakarios and Iain Murray. Fast ε-free inference of simulation models with Bayesian conditional density estimation. Advances in neural information processing systems , 29, 2016. [5] Jan-Matthis Lueckmann, Pedro J Goncalves, Giacomo Bassetto, Kaan Öcal, Marcel Nonnen-macher, and Jakob H Macke. Flexible statistical inference for mechanistic models of neural dynamics. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. [6] David Greenberg, Marcel Nonnenmacher, and Jakob Macke. Automatic posterior transformation for likelihood-free inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 2404– 2414. PMLR, 2019. [7] Maximilian Dax, Stephen R Green, Jonathan Gair, Michael Deistler, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Jakob H. Macke. Group equivariant neural posterior estimation. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. [8] Tomas Geffner, George Papamakarios, and Andriy Mnih. Compositional score modeling for simulation-based inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 11098–11116. PMLR, 2023. [9] Louis Sharrock, Jack Simons, Song Liu, and Mark Beaumont. Sequential neural score estima-tion: Likelihood-free inference with conditional score based diffusion models. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 44565–44602. PMLR, 2024. [10] Jonas Wildberger, Maximilian Dax, Simon Buchholz, Stephen Green, Jakob H Macke, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Flow matching for scalable simulation-based inference. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 16837–16864, 2023. [11] George Papamakarios, David Sterratt, and Iain Murray. Sequential neural likelihood: Fast likelihood-free inference with autoregressive flows. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 837–848. PMLR, 2019. [12] Jan-Matthis Lueckmann, Giacomo Bassetto, Theofanis Karaletsos, and Jakob H Macke. Likelihood-free inference with emulator networks. In Symposium on Advances in Approx-imate Bayesian Inference , pages 32–53. PMLR, 2019. [13] Jan Boelts, Jan-Matthis Lueckmann, Richard Gao, and Jakob H Macke. Flexible and efficient simulation-based inference for models of decision-making. Elife , 11:e77220, 2022. 10 [14] Conor Durkan, Iain Murray, and George Papamakarios. On contrastive learning for likelihood-free inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 2771–2781. PMLR, 2020. [15] Joeri Hermans, Volodimir Begy, and Gilles Louppe. Likelihood-free MCMC with amortized approximate ratio estimators. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 4239– 4248. PMLR, 2020. [16] Joeri Hermans, Arnaud Delaunoy, François Rozet, Antoine Wehenkel, Volodimir Begy, and Gilles Louppe. A crisis in simulation-based inference? Beware, your posterior approximations can be unfaithful. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2022. [17] Benjamin K Miller, Christoph Weniger, and Patrick Forré. Contrastive neural ratio estimation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 35, pages 3262–3278, 2022. [18] Manuel Gloeckler, Michael Deistler, and Jakob H. Macke. Variational methods for simulation-based inference. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022. [19] Stefan T. Radev, Marvin Schmitt, Valentin Pratz, Umberto Picchini, Ullrich Köthe, and Paul-Christian Bürkner. Jana: Jointly amortized neural approximation of complex Bayesian models. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence , volume 216, pages 1695–1706. PMLR, 2023. [20] He Jia. Simulation-based inference with quantile regression. International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. [21] Manuel Gloeckler, Michael Deistler, Christian Dietrich Weilbach, Frank Wood, and Jakob H. Macke. All-in-one simulation-based inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 235, pages 15735–15766. PMLR, 2024. [22] Maximilian Dax, Stephen R Green, Jonathan Gair, Nihar Gupte, Michael Pürrer, Vivien Ray-mond, Jonas Wildberger, Jakob H Macke, Alessandra Buonanno, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Real-time inference for binary neutron star mergers using machine learning. Nature , 639(8053): 49–53, 2025. [23] Lukas N. Groschner, Jonatan G. Malis, Birte Zuidinga, and Alexander Borst. A biophysical account of multiplication by a single neuron. Nature , 603(7899):119–123, 2022. [24] Mark A Beaumont, Wenyang Zhang, and David J Balding. Approximate Bayesian computation in population genetics. Genetics , 162(4):2025–2035, 2002. [25] Mark A Beaumont, Jean-Marie Cornuet, Jean-Michel Marin, and Christian P Robert. Adaptive approximate Bayesian computation. Biometrika , 96(4):983–990, 2009. [26] Simon N Wood. Statistical inference for noisy nonlinear ecological dynamic systems. Nature ,466(7310):1102–1104, 2010. [27] Jan-Matthis Lueckmann, Jan Boelts, David Greenberg, Pedro Goncalves, and Jakob Macke. Benchmarking simulation-based inference. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 343–351. PMLR, 2021. [28] Atilim Güne¸ s Baydin, Lei Shao, Wahid Bhimji, Lukas Heinrich, Lawrence Meadows, Jialin Liu, Andreas Munk, Saeid Naderiparizi, Bradley Gram-Hansen, Gilles Louppe, et al. Etalumis: Bringing probabilistic programming to scientific simulators at scale. In Proceedings of the international conference for high performance computing, networking, storage and analysis ,pages 1–24, 2019. [29] Johann Brehmer, Gilles Louppe, Juan Pavez, and Kyle Cranmer. Mining gold from implicit models to improve likelihood-free inference. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,117(10):5242–5249, 2020. [30] Christian Weilbach, Boyan Beronov, Frank Wood, and William Harvey. Structured condi-tional continuous normalizing flows for efficient amortized inference in graphical models. In 

International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , pages 4441–4451. PMLR, 2020. 11 [31] Manuel Gloeckler, Shoji Toyota, Kenji Fukumizu, and Jakob H. Macke. Compositional simulation-based inference for time series. In International Conference on Learning Represen-tations , 2025. [32] Anastasia N Krouglova, Hayden R Johnson, Basile Confavreux, Michael Deistler, and Pedro J Gonçalves. Multifidelity simulation-based inference for computationally expensive simulators. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.08416 , 2025. [33] Caroline Tatsuoka, Minglei Yang, Dongbin Xiu, and Guannan Zhang. Multi-fidelity parameter estimation using conditional diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.01894 , 2025. [34] Fredrik Wrede, Robin Eriksson, Richard Jiang, Linda Petzold, Stefan Engblom, Andreas Hellander, and Prashant Singh. Robust and integrative Bayesian neural networks for likelihood-free parameter inference. In International Joint Conference on Neural Networks , pages 1–10. IEEE, 2022. [35] Pablo Lemos, Miles Cranmer, Muntazir Abidi, ChangHoon Hahn, Michael Eickenberg, Elena Massara, David Yallup, and Shirley Ho. Robust simulation-based inference in cosmology with Bayesian neural networks. Machine Learning: Science and Technology , 4(1):01LT01, 2023. [36] Arnaud Delaunoy, Maxence de la Brassinne Bonardeaux, Siddharth Mishra-Sharma, and Gilles Louppe. Low-budget simulation-based inference with Bayesian neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.15136 , 2024. [37] Michael Deistler, Pedro J Goncalves, and Jakob H Macke. Truncated proposals for scalable and hassle-free simulation-based inference. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 35, pages 23135–23149, 2022. [38] Noah Hollmann, Samuel Müller, Lennart Purucker, Arjun Krishnakumar, Max Körfer, Shi Bin Hoo, Robin Tibor Schirrmeister, and Frank Hutter. Accurate predictions on small data with a tabular foundation model. Nature , 637(8045):319–326, 2025. [39] Tuan Anh Le, Atilim Giine¸ s Baydin, Robert Zinkov, and Frank Wood. Using synthetic data to train neural networks is model-based reasoning. In International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) , pages 3514–3521. IEEE, 2017. [40] Danilo Rezende and Shakir Mohamed. Variational inference with normalizing flows. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 37, pages 1530–1538. PMLR, 2015. [41] George Papamakarios, Theo Pavlakou, and Iain Murray. Masked autoregressive flow for density estimation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30, 2017. [42] Conor Durkan, Artur Bekasov, Iain Murray, and George Papamakarios. Neural spline flows. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 32, 2019. [43] Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Jingyuan Ma, Rui Li, Heming Xia, Jingjing Xu, Zhiyong Wu, Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Lei Li, and Zhifang Sui. A survey on in-context learning. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1107–1128, 2024. [44] Samuel Müller, Noah Hollmann, Sebastian Pineda Arango, Josif Grabocka, and Frank Hutter. Transformers can do Bayesian inference. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions , 2022. [45] Noah Hollmann, Samuel Müller, Katharina Eggensperger, and Frank Hutter. TabPFN: A transformer that solves small tabular classification problems in a second. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [46] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. [47] Thomas Nagler. Statistical foundations of prior-data fitted networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 25660–25676. PMLR, 2023. 12 [48] Valentin Thomas, Junwei Ma, Rasa Hosseinzadeh, Keyvan Golestan, Guangwei Yu, Maks Volkovs, and Anthony L Caterini. Retrieval & fine-tuning for in-context tabular models. 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:108439–108467, 2024. [49] Mykhailo Koshil, Thomas Nagler, Matthias Feurer, and Katharina Eggensperger. Towards localization via data embedding for TabPFN. In NeurIPS 2024 Third Table Representation Learning Workshop , 2024. [50] Yanzhi Chen, Dinghuai Zhang, Michael U. Gutmann, Aaron Courville, and Zhanxing Zhu. Neural approximate sufficient statistics for implicit models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. [51] Si-Yang Liu and Han-Jia Ye. TabPFN unleashed: A scalable and effective solution to tabular classification problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02527 , 2025. [52] Masashi Sugiyama, Takafumi Kanamori, Taiji Suzuki, Shohei Hido, Jun Sese, Ichiro Takeuchi, and Liwei Wang. A density-ratio framework for statistical data processing. IPSJ Transactions on Computer Vision and Applications , 1:183–208, 2009. [53] David Lopez-Paz and Maxime Oquab. Revisiting classifier two-sample tests. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2017. [54] Alvaro Tejero-Cantero, Jan Boelts, Michael Deistler, Jan-Matthis Lueckmann, Conor Durkan, Pedro J. Gonçalves, David S. Greenberg, and Jakob H. Macke. sbi: A toolkit for simulation-based inference. Journal of Open Source Software , 5(52):2505, 2020. [55] Jan Boelts, Michael Deistler, Manuel Gloeckler, Álvaro Tejero-Cantero, Jan-Matthis Lueck-mann, Guy Moss, Peter Steinbach, Thomas Moreau, Fabio Muratore, Julia Linhart, Conor Durkan, Julius Vetter, Benjamin Kurt Miller, Maternus Herold, Abolfazl Ziaeemehr, Matthijs Pals, Theo Gruner, Sebastian Bischoff, Nastya Krouglova, Richard Gao, Janne K. Lappalainen, Bálint Mucsányi, Felix Pei, Auguste Schulz, Zinovia Stefanidi, Pedro Rodrigues, Cornelius Schröder, Faried Abu Zaid, Jonas Beck, Jaivardhan Kapoor, David S. Greenberg, Pedro J. Gonçalves, and Jakob H. Macke. sbi reloaded: a toolkit for simulation-based inference work-flows. Journal of Open Source Software , 10(108):7754, 2025. [56] Andrew Frank. UCI machine learning repository. http://archive. ics. uci. edu/ml , 2010. [57] Marvin Schmitt, Paul-Christian Bürkner, Ullrich Köthe, and Stefan T Radev. Detecting model misspecification in amortized bayesian inference with neural networks: An extended investiga-tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.03154 , 2024. [58] A. L. Hodgkin and A. F. Huxley. A quantitative description of membrane current and its application to conduction and excitation in nerve. J Physiol , 117(4):500–544, 1952. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.1952.sp004764. [59] Martin Pospischil, Maria Toledo-Rodriguez, Cyril Monier, Zuzanna Piwkowska, Thierry Bal, Yves Frégnac, Henry Markram, and Alain Destexhe. Minimal Hodgkin–Huxley type models for different classes of cortical and thalamic neurons. Biological cybernetics , 99:427–441, 2008. [60] Pedro J Gonçalves, Jan-Matthis Lueckmann, Michael Deistler, Marcel Nonnenmacher, Kaan Öcal, Giacomo Bassetto, Chaitanya Chintaluri, William F Podlaski, Sara A Haddad, Tim P Vogels, et al. Training deep neural density estimators to identify mechanistic models of neural dynamics. Elife , 9:e56261, 2020. [61] Allen Institute for Brain Science. Allen cell types database. https://celltypes.brain-map. org , 2015. [62] Richard Gao, Michael Deistler, and Jakob H Macke. Generalized Bayesian inference for scientific simulators via amortized cost estimation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:80191–80219, 2023. [63] Nicholas Tolley, Pedro LC Rodrigues, Alexandre Gramfort, and Stephanie R Jones. Methods and considerations for estimating parameters in biophysically detailed neural models with simulation based inference. PLOS Computational Biology , 20(2):e1011108, 2024. 13 [64] Yves Bernaerts, Michael Deistler, Pedro J Goncalves, Jonas Beck, Marcel Stimberg, Federico Scala, Andreas S Tolias, Jakob H Macke, Dmitry Kobak, and Philipp Berens. Combined statistical-mechanistic modeling links ion channel genes to physiology of cortical neuron types. 

bioRxiv , 2023. [65] Astrid A Prinz, Cyrus P Billimoria, and Eve Marder. Alternative to hand-tuning conductance-based models: construction and analysis of databases of model neurons. Journal of neurophysi-ology , 2003. [66] Astrid A Prinz, Dirk Bucher, and Eve Marder. Similar network activity from disparate circuit parameters. Nature neuroscience , 7(12):1345–1352, 2004. [67] Michael Deistler, Jakob H Macke, and Pedro J Gonçalves. Energy-efficient network activity from disparate circuit parameters. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 119(44): e2207632119, 2022. [68] Pierre Glaser, Michael Arbel, Samo Hromadka, Arnaud Doucet, and Arthur Gretton. Maximum likelihood learning of unnormalized models for simulation-based inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.14756 , 2023. [69] Timothy Hospedales, Antreas Antoniou, Paul Micaelli, and Amos Storkey. Meta-learning in neural networks: A survey. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 44 (9):5149–5169, 2021. [70] Mike Wu, Kristy Choi, Noah Goodman, and Stefano Ermon. Meta-amortized variational inference and learning. In Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 34, pages 6404–6412, 2020. [71] Ekaterina Iakovleva, Jakob Verbeek, and Karteek Alahari. Meta-learning with shared amortized variational inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 4572–4582. PMLR, 2020. [72] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877–1901, 2020. [73] Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy S Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What can transformers learn in-context? A case study of simple function classes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:30583–30598, 2022. [74] Madhur Panwar, Kabir Ahuja, and Navin Goyal. In-context learning through the Bayesian prism. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. [75] Sarthak Mittal, Niels Leif Bracher, Guillaume Lajoie, Priyank Jaini, and Marcus Brubaker. Amortized in-context bayesian posterior estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.06601 , 2025. [76] Arik Reuter, Tim GJ Rudner, Vincent Fortuin, and David Rügamer. Can transformers learn full Bayesian inference in context? arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.16825 , 2025. [77] George Whittle, Juliusz Ziomek, Jacob Rawling, and Michael A Osborne. Distribution trans-formers: Fast approximate Bayesian inference with on-the-fly prior adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02463 , 2025. [78] Derek Qiang Xu, F Olcay Cirit, Reza Asadi, Yizhou Sun, and Wei Wang. Mixture of in-context prompters for tabular PFNs. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [79] Junwei Ma, Valentin Thomas, Guangwei Yu, and Anthony L. Caterini. In-context data distilla-tion with TabPFN. In ICLR 2024 Workshop on Mathematical and Empirical Understanding of Foundation Models , 2024. [80] Benjamin Feuer, Robin Schirrmeister, Valeriia Cherepanova, Chinmay Hegde, Frank Hutter, Micah Goldblum, Niv Cohen, and Colin White. Tunetables: Context optimization for scalable prior-data fitted networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:83430– 83464, 2024. 14 [81] Yuxin Wang, Botian Jiang, YiranGuo, Quan Gan, David Wipf, Xuanjing Huang, and Xipeng Qiu. Prior-fitted networks scale to larger datasets when treated as weak learners. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , 2025. [82] Han-Jia Ye, Si-Yang Liu, and Wei-Lun Chao. A closer look at TabPFN v2: Strength, limitation, and extension. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.17361 , 2025. [83] Shi Bin Hoo, Samuel Müller, David Salinas, and Frank Hutter. The tabular foundation model TabPFN outperforms specialized time series forecasting models based on simple features. In 

NeurIPS 2024 Third Table Representation Learning Workshop , 2024. [84] Junwei Ma, Apoorv Dankar, George Stein, Guangwei Yu, and Anthony Caterini. TabPFGen – tabular data generation with TabPFN. In NeurIPS 2023 Second Table Representation Learning Workshop , 2023. [85] Jingang Qu, David Holzmüller, Gaël Varoquaux, and Marine Le Morvan. TabICL: A tabular foundation model for in-context learning on large data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.05564 , 2025. [86] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 32, 2019. [87] Omry Yadan. Hydra - a framework for elegantly configuring complex applications. Github, 2019. [88] Benjamin Feuer, Niv Cohen, and Chinmay Hegde. Scaling TabPFN: Sketching and feature selection for tabular prior-data fitted networks. In NeurIPS 2023 Second Table Representation Learning Workshop , 2023. [89] Tianhong Li, Dina Katabi, and Kaiming He. Return of unconditional generation: A self-supervised representation generation method. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:125441–125468, 2024. [90] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2015. [91] Michael Deistler, Kyra L. Kadhim, Matthijs Pals, Jonas Beck, Ziwei Huang, Manuel Gloeckler, Janne K. Lappalainen, Cornelius Schröder, Philipp Berens, Pedro J. Gonçalves, and Jakob H. Macke. Differentiable simulation enables large-scale training of detailed biophysical models of neural dynamics. bioRxiv , pages 2024–08, 2024. [92] Christian Dietrich Weilbach, William Harvey, and Frank Wood. Graphically structured diffusion models. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 36887–36909. PMLR, 2023. [93] Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30, 2017. [94] Manuel Gloeckler, Michael Deistler, and Jakob H. Macke. Adversarial robustness of amortized Bayesian inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 202, pages 11493–11524. PMLR, 2023. [95] Pablo Lemos, Adam Coogan, Yashar Hezaveh, and Laurence Perreault-Levasseur. Sampling-based accuracy testing of posterior estimators for general inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 19256–19273. PMLR, 2023. [96] In-Kwon Yeo and Richard A Johnson. A new family of power transformations to improve normality or symmetry. Biometrika , 87(4):954–959, 2000. [97] Will Grathwohl, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Jesse Bettencourt, and David Duvenaud. Scalable re-versible generative models with free-form continuous dynamics. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. 15 Appendix Table of Contents 

A Software and computational resources 17 B Additional method details 17 

B.1 Pseudocode: NPE-PFN and TSNPE-PFN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 B.2 Filtering to increase effective context size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 B.3 Embedding networks for high-dimensional data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 B.4 Unconditional density estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 

C Experimental details 19 

C.1 SBI benchmark simulators for amortized and sequential inference . . . . . . . . . 19 C.2 Misspecification simulator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 C.3 Single-compartment Hodgkin-Huxley simulator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 C.4 Pyloric Network Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 

D Additional experiments 22 

D.1 Additional tasks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 D.2 SBI benchmark with more baseline methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 D.3 Inference speed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 D.4 Embedding networks for high-dimensional data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 D.5 Comparison of autoregressive and ratio-based density evaluation . . . . . . . . . . 25 D.6 Varying the number of filtered simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 D.7 Varying feature and noise distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 D.8 Order of autoregressive sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 D.9 Unconditional density estimation on the UCI datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 16 A Software and computational resources 

Our implementation of NPE-PFN is based on PyTorch [ 86 ] and the TabPFN [ 38 ] library. We use the SBI library [ 54 ] to run the SBI baselines, and hydra [ 87 ] for experiment and hyperparameter management. Code to use NPE-PFN and reproduce the results is available at https://github. com/mackelab/npe-pfn .We use a mix of Nvidia 2080TI, A100, and H100 GPUs to obtain the results related to NPE-PFN. Some results, such as those for the unfiltered NPE-PFN variant together with a simulation budget of 

10 5 require the use of GPUs with high VRAM due to the large context used. SBI baselines were run on 8 CPU cores, as normalizing flow training and sampling only benefit from GPUs for large sample sizes and dimensionalities. 

# B Additional method details 

B.1 Pseudocode: NPE-PFN and TSNPE-PFN 

In Alg. 1 and Alg. 2, we provide pseudocode for NPE-PFN and TSNPE-PFN, respectively. Note that NPE-PFN is training-free. In practice, this means that training consists of storing the training data 

D = {(θi, xi)}Ni=1 for in-context processing during inference. 

Algorithm 1 NPE-PFN 

Require: Observation xo, simulations Dfull = {(θi, xi)}Ni=1 , TabPFN regressor qreg  

> ψ

(· | · ), filter size Nfilter  

> 1:

if Nfilter < N then ▷ if filtering is active  

> 2:

di = d(xo, xi) ▷ compute filter distances  

> 3:

D ← { (θi, xi) : i ∈ argtop Nfilter (di)} ▷ select Nfilter closest simulations  

> 4:

else  

> 5:

D ← D full  

> 6:

end if  

> 7:

for j = 1 , . . . , d θ do ▷ for all parameter dimension dθ 

> 8:

D<j = {θji , [θ<j i , xi]} ▷ build context data set  

> 9:

θj ∼ qreg  

> ψ

(θj | θ<j , xo, D<j ) ▷ sample one parameter dimension from TabPFN  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

return θ = [ θ1, θ 2, . . . , θ dθ ]⊤ ▷ posterior sample 

B.2 Filtering to increase effective context size 

To allow NPE-PFN to make use of more than 10 4 simulations, we filter the simulations based on their relevance to a given observation. In the following, we show that this procedure does not bias the estimation of the posterior and discuss details and possible extensions. For a given prior p(θ) and likelihood p(x | θ), the joint distribution is given by 

p(x, θ) = p(x | θ)p(θ) and the posterior distribution is given by 

p(θ | x) = p(x | θ)p(θ)

p(x) = p(x, θ)

R p(x, θ′) dθ′ . (B-1) Formally, a filter is a non-negative function fxo (x) based on some observation xo, where we require 

fxo (xo) > 0. Crucially, reweighing the joint distribution by the filter does not affect the posterior. More specifically, with the reweighted joint ˜p(x, θ) ∝ p(x, θ)fxo (x), we have 

˜p(θ | x) = ˜p(x, θ)

R ˜p(x, θ′) dθ′ = fxo (x)p(x, θ)

R fxo (x)p(x, θ′) dθ′ = p(θ | x), (B-2) as fxo (x) cancels out due to its independence from θ.In theory, any function f satisfying these properties can be used to filter for relevant simulations. In this work, we only consider an ABC-like filter, where fxo (x) = I(d(x, xo) < ϵ ) is the indicator 17 Algorithm 2 TSNPE-PFN with rejection sampling 

Require: Observation xo, simulator p(x | θ), prior p(θ), TabPFN classifier qcls  

> ψ

(· | · ), TabPFN regressor qreg  

> ψ

(· | · ), number of rounds R, number of posterior samples for ratio M , simulations per round Nr , truncation fraction α

— Initialize dataset —  

> 1:

Draw Nr prior samples θi ∼ p(θ) 

> 2:

Simulate samples xi ∼ p(x | θi) 

> 3:

Initialize D = {(θi, xi)}Nr 

> i=1
> 4:

for r = 1 , . . . , R do 

— Construct fast ratio-based density estimator —  

> 5:

Draw M posterior samples θpost  

> j

∼ q(θ | xo) using Alg. 1 with D as context  

> 6:

Assign class y = 1 to θpost  

> j

and y = 0 to θuni  

> j

∼ U (θmin , θmax ) 

> 7:

Define classifier dataset Dcls = {(θj , y j )}2Mj=1 combining θpost  

> j

and θuni  

> j
> 8:

With Dcls as context, qcls  

> ψ

can be used to estimate posterior density: 

qcls (θ | xo) = qcls  

> ψ

(y = 1 | θ, Dcls )1 − qcls  

> ψ

(y = 1 | θ, Dcls ) .

— Estimate high-density region (HDR) —  

> 9:

qs = {qcls (θpost  

> j

|xo) for j = 1 , . . . , M } ▷ evaluate posterior densities  

> 10:

kα = quantile(qs, α) ▷ estimate HDR threshold 

— Rejection sample from truncated prior —  

> 11:

Dr = ∅ 

> 12:

while |Dr | < N r do  

> 13:

θ ∼ p(θ) ▷ sample from prior  

> 14:

if qcls (θ | xo) ≥ kα then ▷ accept if in HDR  

> 15:

x ∼ p(x | θ) 

> 16:

Dr ← Dr ∪ { (θ, x)} 

> 17:

end if  

> 18:

end while  

> 19:

D = D ∪ D r 

> 20:

end for 

— Sample final samples —  

> 21:

Draw posterior samples θi ∼ q(θ | xo) using Alg. 1 with D as context  

> 22:

return {θi}i

function that evaluates to 1, when some distance d(x, xo) between the observation xo simulation 

x is smaller than some threshold ϵ > 0, and is 0 otherwise. As described in Sec. 2.3, we use the Euclidean distance in feature-wise standardized observation space and choose ϵ adaptively to include the 10 4 closest simulations. The autoregressive manner in which we use TabPFN for density estimation allows for more com-plex filter designs that consider not only the observation xo, but also already processed parameter dimensions. In particular, it is possible to select parameter-simulation pairs (θ, x) based on their relevance to the parameter dimensions <j and observation xo, when using TabPFN to estimate 

p(θj | xo, θ<j ) = qψ (θj | xo, θ<j , D<j ). We do not investigate this approach here and leave the design of more complex (autoregressive) filters to future work. 

B.3 Embedding networks for high-dimensional data 

For NPE, it is typical to employ an embedding net e = fϕ(x) depending on the case of high-dimensional data. The embedding network can be end-to-end trained together with the associated 18 conditional density estimator qϕ(θ | fϕ(x)) and helps to identify lower-dimensional “sufficient” statistics, which the density estimator can more effectively handle [ 5 ]. The embedding net is usually chosen to follow existing properties of the data at hand; i.e., for image-like simulation, one might employ a convolutional neural network. In principle, this end-to-end approach is directly applicable to NPE-PFN, but it would require differentiation through the TabPFN model, which can be expensive. We instead aim to obtain lower dimensional embedding, i.e., “summary features” independent from the pre-trained model. This idea is similar to feature selection schemes usually employed for TabPFN [51, 88]. While various approaches exist for addressing this problem, we investigate the method proposed by Chen et al. [50] , which focuses on maximizing the mutual information between the parameters 

θ and their corresponding embeddings e = fϕ(x), with data x ∼ p(x | θ). The goal is to derive embeddings that serve as “sufficient” statistics for accurately inferring parameters from observed data. However, directly maximizing mutual information is generally intractable, leading to the development of proxy measures. We employ the distance-correlation proxy, which aligns the distances between embeddings with the distances between their associated parameters. Specifically, we optimize the following loss function: 

L(ϕ) = Ep(x,θ )p(x′,θ ′) [d(θ, θ ′) d(fϕ(x), f ϕ(x′))] 

pEp(θ)p(θ′)[d(θ, θ ′)2] Ep(x)p(x′)[d(fϕ(x), f ϕ(x′)) 2] (B-3) We refer to this approach as NPE-PFN-Infomax and present results on using NPE-PFN together with pre-trained embedding nets in Sec. D.4. 

B.4 Unconditional density estimation 

As outlined in Sec. 2.1, TabPFN is designed as a conditional density estimator for one-dimensional densities. For higher-dimensional conditional density estimation, TabPFN can be applied autoregres-sively. To adapt TabPFN for unconditional density estimation, random Gaussian noise is added as the first dimension. The subsequent conditional density estimation is then performed in the same way as for conditional tasks [38]. For conditional density estimation (e.g., posterior estimation), filtering provides an effective method to optimize the context given the corresponding condition. However, this strategy does not generalize to unconditional density estimation. One solution is to manually introduce a conditional structure. Specifically, we partition the support of the target density into independent clusters and estimate each component separately. Formally, we express the target density as a mixture model 

p(x) = 

> n

X

> i=1

p(x | ci) p(ci), (B-4) where p(ci) is the probability of sampling cluster ci, and p(x | ci) is the cluster-specific density estimated via NPE-PFN. This mixture model approach effectively increases the usable context size with the number of clusters. In this work, we apply k-means clustering, which has been explored for TabPFN by Xu et al. [78] outside of density estimation. Other methods to introduce conditional structure, such as those proposed by Li et al. [89] , represent promising directions for future research. We present results on unconditional density estimation in Sec. D.9. 

# C Experimental details 

C.1 SBI benchmark simulators for amortized and sequential inference 

To benchmark NPE-PFN and the sequential version TSNPE-PFN, we use a set of tasks from the SBI benchmark [ 27 ]. This benchmark contains several challenging inference tasks with nonlinear depen-dencies and multi-modal posteriors. We provide an overview of the dimensionality of parameters and observations for all benchmark tasks (Tab. C-1). As described in Sec. 3.1, we measure the quality of the inferred posteriors with a classifier-two-sample-test (C2ST). For the classifier, we use a random forest with the default hyperparameters provided by the SBI library [54]. 19 Table C-1: Overview on the SBI benchmark tasks. For details on the specification of the prior and the exact simulator equations, we refer to Lueckmann et al. [27, Appendix T].                           

> Task Name dim θdim xNotes
> Gaussian Linear 10 10 Mean inference in 10-D Gaussian with fixed covariance Gaussian Mixture 22Common mean of two 2-D Gaussians with varying covariance Two Moons 22Bimodal, two moon-shaped posterior structure SLCP 58Simple Gaussian likelihood, complex posterior Bernoulli GLM 10 10 GLM with Bernoulli observations, smoothness prior SIR 210 Epidemic SIR model, inference of contact and recovery rates Lotka-Volterra 420 Predator-prey dynamics, species interaction parameters

The baseline methods NPE, NLE, NRE and their sequential variants are implemented using the SBI library. All methods use the default normalizing flows (neural spline flow [ 42 ] for NPE, masked autoregressive flow [ 41 ] for NLE) with hyperparameters suggested by the SBI library. Training was performed using the Adam optimizer [ 90 ] with a batch size of 200 and a learning rate of 5 · 10 −4.Training was stopped early based on the validation loss, as evaluated on a held-out set containing 

10% of the available simulations. For the NPE ensembles, five different estimators are trained with different random seeds to obtain a mixture of equally weighted estimators. In all experiments, we use the default version of the TabPFN classifier or regressor for (TS)NPE-PFN, with no changes to hyperparameters such as the softmax temperature. All runtimes for NPE-PFN (Fig. 2b) were obtained using an Nvidia A100 GPU, where possible. For the unfiltered variant of NPE-PFN, an H100 GPU was used for the large context containing 10 5 simulations. 

C.2 Misspecification simulator 

Here, we detail the experimental setup of Sec. 3.2. The misspecification benchmark from Schmitt et al. [57] is given by 

Truth Prior: μ ∼ N (0, I), Likeli.: xi ∼ N (μ, I) (C-5) 

Prior Prior: μ ∼ N (μm, τ mI), Likeli.: xi ∼ N (μ, I) (C-6) 

Likeli. Prior: μ ∼ N (0, I), Likeli.: xi ∼ λBeta (2 , 5) + (1 − λ)N (μ, τ mI) (C-7) where μm ∈ R as mean shift, τm ∈ R+ as standard deviation scaling, and λ ∈ [0 , 1] as the fraction of how many samples are from the true normal or a different beta distribution. For the experiments, we ran 100 simulations for three seeds over all combinations of (μm, τ m, λ ).NPE and NPE-PFN are trained to predict posterior samples. These samples are compared to the reference posterior distribution using C2ST. This reference posterior distribution is defined with respect to the well-specified distribution. Thus, this task is designed to evaluate the robustness of the model under prior or likelihood misspecification. 

C.3 Single-compartment Hodgkin-Huxley simulator 

To perform inference on the observations from the Allen cell types database [ 61 ], we use a single-compartment Hodkin-Huxley model following the one proposed in Pospischil et al. [59] . This model has four types of conductances (sodium, delayed-rectifier potassium, slow voltage-dependent potassium, and leak) and a total of eight parameters. Following Gonçalves et al. [60] , who previously used this model for simulation-based inference, we compute seven summary statistics on the simulated and observed action potentials. These are spike count, mean, and standard deviation of the resting potential, and the first four voltage moments (mean, standard deviation, skew, and kurtosis). We also use the same uniform prior as in Gonçalves et al. [60] . For sequential inference with TSNPE and TSNPE-PFN, we use a total of 10 3 or 10 4 simulations, equally divided over five rounds. For both methods, we sample from the truncated proposal using rejection sampling, taking into account the 

1 − ε highest density region with ε = 10 −3.Here, we provide posterior predictive samples for all 10 observations from the Allen cell types database using TSNPE-PFN (Fig. D-11) and TSNPE (Fig. D-12), complementing the results presented in the main text (Fig. 4). Importantly, both inference and the computation of the average predictive 20 distance are performed on the summary statistics and not directly on the simulations or observations. Thus, features beyond those encoded by the summary statistics are not captured. For TSNPE-PFN, the posterior predictives closely match with the observations in most cases, with a few exceptions such as obs. 3 and obs. 6. In contrast, flow-based TSNPE yields posterior predictives that are less similar to the observations, with a few exceptions such as obs. 1 and obs. 8. These qualitative results further support the quantitative results reported in the main text, demonstrating that TNSPE-PF performs more reliable inference with fewer simulations. 

C.4 Pyloric Network Model 

A key challenge in this setting is the extreme sparsity of valid simulations. In particular, 99% of parameter samples from the prior yield implausible voltage traces, preventing the computation of summary statistics. For this reason, previous work has relied on millions of simulations for an amortized NPE-based posterior approximation (18 million in Gonçalves et al. [60] ). The simulation count could later be reduced to 9 million by restricting the prior to valid simulations with an additional classifier [ 67 ]. Moreover, several sequential algorithms have been developed to tackle this problem. First, SNVI was proposed, which learns both a likelihood and a variational approximation of the posterior. Notably, the likelihood model was only based on “valid” simulations and corrected by a classifier that predicts whether parameters are valid. This approach made it possible to produce good posterior samples with 3.5 · 10 5 simulations [ 18 ]. This number was reduced even further to only 1.5 · 10 5 simulations by S-UNLE, which made use of energy-based models and Langevin dynamic MCMC [ 68 ]. Later, this approach was extended to SNPE approximations, specifically using TSNPE [37]. Similarly, we want to use only valid simulations in the context of NPE-PFN and therefore adaptively truncate the prior using a TabPFN classifier. This approach is based on the intuition that the posterior should place little or no probability mass on regions in parameter space that are likely to lead to invalid simulations [ 18 , 37 , 67 ]. Specifically, as simulations accumulate over rounds, we randomly fill the context of the TabPFN classifier with up to 5 · 10 3 valid and invalid simulations. The prior is then truncated to ˜pval (θ) ∝ I(P (valid | θ) > c )p(θ), where we choose c = 0 .3. We then use TSNPE-PFN together with an approximate importance resampling scheme instead of rejection sampling for efficiency. Specifically, we oversample by a factor of K = 10 and obtain 10 4 samples, which are then resampled to 10 3 samples based on their importance weight w(θ) = ˜ pval (θ)/q ϕ(θ | xo). For evaluation, we exactly follow Glaser et al. [68] by computing the percentage of valid simulations as well as the energy score in each round. Note, however, that the overall experimental setting is not perfectly identical as we use a faster implementation of the pyloric network simulator based on Jaxley [91]. Previous sequential methods started with an initial simulation budget of 5 · 10 4 prior simulations to acquire a set of ∼ 500 valid simulations. Due to the effectiveness of NPE-PFN on small simulation budgets, we start with only 5 · 10 3 simulations, thus acquiring only ∼ 50 valid simulations in the first round. From there, we acquire 10 3 new simulations in each round, updating both NPE-PFN and the restricted classifier with the additional data. We stop after 45 rounds for a total of 5 · 10 4

simulations. Despite this limited budget, TSNPE-PFN quickly converges to a posterior that produces a high number of valid simulations that closely match the observed measurement. After the final round, we obtain a valid percentage of 96 .83% and an energy score of 0.0899 using only 5 · 10 4

simulations—the starting point of the other methods—and still surpass their final performance (Fig. 5). The evaluation presented in the main text only examines the fidelity of the posterior predictives. Therefore, we include a visualization of the full posterior distribution after the final round (Fig. D-13), which shows broad marginal distributions and similar features as the posteriors reported in previous work [18, 37, 60, 68]. In terms of runtime, most of the computation time is spent on sampling from the restricted prior and running simulations. During the first few rounds, the process is faster (about 2 minutes) due to the smaller context size in TSNPE-PFN. Once the context limit is reached, the time to propose the next 

10 3 parameters stabilizes at about 7 minutes, using an Nvidia H100 GPU. Notably, the performance of previous state-of-the-art methods on this task is surpassed after only 10 rounds—an hour of runtime (including simulation time)—which is substantially faster than any previously proposed methods [18, 68]. 21 We choose the default order as the autoregressive order for sampling. The total number of possible permutations in this task is greater than 10 33 , thus finding the optimal permutation in this space is highly challenging. To gain some insight, we perform an ablation study on 50 distinct random permutations using the context dataset identified by the final -round posterior. We compute the presented metrics with 10 3 simulations. We found that the energy score varies between 0.081 - 0.094 and the valid rates between 96% - 98% (5% and 95% quantile each). These ranges match closely with the results reported in Fig. 5 and demonstrate that there is no significant effect for the autoregressive order in this experiment. Appendix Sec. D.8 reports the same conclusion across all benchmark tasks. 

# D Additional experiments 

D.1 Additional tasks 

Here we extend the SBI benchmark experiments (Sec. 3.1) with additional inference tasks from other scientific fields or interesting synthetic tasks used in previous work. Specifically, the additional tasks include simulators from physics (Weinberg, Stellar Streams), com-puter science (M/G/1 queue) [ 16 ], as well as “structured” synthetic tasks (Tree, HMM) [ 21 ]. Out of these, the stellar streams simulator stands out as particularly computationally demanding ( > 30 min. per simulation per CPU core; with two-dimensional parameters, and 199 dimensional data). For this reason, we investigate the performance only up to 10 4 simulations. The tasks in Hermans et al. [16] do not come with a ground truth posterior. We therefore evaluate them only via the average log posterior density (Fig. D-1a). Overall, the results on these additional tasks again demonstrate that, for a small simulation budget, NPE-PFN significantly outperforms NPE. Specifically, NPE-PFN strongly outperforms NPE on tasks with sparse conditional dependencies, i.e., Tree, HMM, Streams, in which it is one to three orders of magnitudes more simulation-efficient than NPE. The stellar streams task is a good example use-case, where this efficiency is particularly beneficial: Attaining 100 simulations is feasible on a consumer-grade CPU (10 cores) in 5 hours, and NPE-PFN achieves a comparable performance to NPE with 10 4 simulations, which would require 20 days. In addition, we investigated the calibration of NPE-PFN for which we observed a similar trend (Fig. D-1b on a subset of tasks). Finally, we performed a direct comparison to reference posteriors where available. We also extended the HMM task to 50 parameter and data dimensions as an additional test for high-dimensional yet “structured” parameter spaces (Fig. D-1c). Here, NPE-PFN generally outperformed NPE. The HMM example specifically illustrates how NPE (or, more generally, conditional density estima-tion) fundamentally struggles with dimensionality, independent of the complexity of the simulation process. One approach to address this challenge is to incorporate suitable inductive biases or con-straints (such as known conditional dependencies) into the estimation network architecture [ 21 , 30 , 92 ]. The inductive bias from TabPFN as used in NPE-PFN seems to be especially beneficial in such cases. TabPFN was trained exclusively on synthetic datasets generated from random structural causal models (SCMs), which by construction exhibit (sparse) conditional (in-)dependencies. We therefore hypothesize that pretraining on SCMs enables TabPFN to automatically detect and exploit such (in-)dependencies directly from data. A detailed investigation of these mechanisms would be an interesting direction for future work. 

D.2 SBI benchmark with more baseline methods 

Here, we extend the SBI benchmark experiments (Sec. 3.1) by including two additional baselines: neural ratio estimation (NRE) from Durkan et al. [14] and an ensemble of NPE models, denoted NPE (Ensemble) following Hermans et al. [16] . Ensemble models are known to improve predictive performance [ 93 ] and, in the context of SBI, to improve simulation-based calibration (SBC) [ 16 ]. We evaluate all methods under the same experimental conditions as before (Sec. 3.1), using five equally weighted ensemble members for NPE (Ensemble). We present results in terms of C2ST and SBC metrics (Fig. D-2, extending the results from the main text (Fig. 2). For SBC, we use the Error of Diagonal (EoD) to quantify the deviation from perfect calibration. NRE performs similarly or worse on all tasks, while NPE (Ensemble) matches standard NPE in terms of C2ST and achieves the best calibration of all baselines. NPE-PFN is comparable to NPE (Ensemble) in terms of calibration on most tasks, while often outperforming it in 22 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5Num. sim. 0.0 0.1 NLL                                                          

> Weinberg 10 210 310 424
> Streams 10 210 310 410 524
> Tree 10 210 310 410 5
> −2.5 0.0 2.5
> MG1 10 210 310 410 510 15
> HMM NPE NPE-PFN 10 210 310 410 50.5 1.0 C2ST
> Tree HMM HMM[50d] 10 210 310 410 5Num. sim. Num. sim. 0.05 0.10 0.15 EoD
> Weinberg 10 210 310 410 5
> Tree 10 210 310 4
> Streams
> abc

Figure D-1: Results on additional tasks. (a) Performance under the average negative log likelihood metric (NLL) across five new tasks for NPE and NPE-PFN. ( b) Calibration error on a subset of the new tasks. ( c) Performance in C2ST against reference posteriors on tasks for which reference are available. We also investigate a different parameterization of the HMM tasks by increasing dimensionality. Note that the simulation budget of the Streams tasks only goes up to 10 4 simulations. predictive accuracy and simulation efficiency. Calibration plots (Fig. D-3) corroborate the EoD-based calibration summary with fine-grained information. These results underscore that NPE-PFN not only achieves strong predictive performance but also provides well-calibrated posteriors that match or exceed ensembles. While we do not directly compare NPE-PFN with the work of Delaunoy et al. [36] , who present a SBI method for small simulation budgets using Bayesian neural networks, their method reports modest gains over ensembles, whereas NPE-PFN consistently outperforms them—further emphasizing the effectiveness of our approach with a limited simulation budget. Throughout this manuscript, the comparisons of NPE-PFN with baseline methods are performed using the sbi library’s default hyperparameters [ 55 ]. Here, we additionally perform hyperparameter optimization of our main baseline method NPE. For each task and simulation budget, we conduct a random search for flow (flow type, number of flow layers, dimensionality of hidden flow layers) and optimization (batch size, learning rate) hyperparameters. In each setting, we limit the computing time to ten hours. For seven tasks and four simulation budgets, this results in a total computing time of 280 hours. Compared to NPE with the default settings, NPE (Sweep) achieves better performance in some tasks, particularly with smaller simulation budgets (Fig. D-4). This is due to the shorter training times with 10 2 and 10 3 simulations, enabling the random search to cover large parts of the search space. For 10 4 and 10 5 simulations, no or only minor improvements can be observed. Further improvements for larger budgets would require more computing time and better hyperparameter optimization algorithms, such as Bayesian optimization. Despite the substantial computing time per setting, the optimized NPE (Sweep) still lags behind NPE-PFN in terms of performance for most tasks with smaller budgets (Fig. D-4). Overall, these results again demonstrate NPE-PFN’s strong default performance, providing an easy-to-use method that is competitive with, or even superior to, baseline methods where intensive hyperparameter optimization was performed. This strong default performance is particularly beneficial in the sequential setting, where hyperparameter optimization poses significant challenges due to long inference times, changing training conditions across rounds, and the difficulty of selecting suitable metrics for optimization. 

D.3 Inference speed 

While NPE-PFN is completely training-free, the autoregressive use of TabPFN requires computational effort during inference (Fig. 2b). The inference speed of NPE-PFN depends on three parameters: 1) the number of simulations passed as the in-context dataset; 2) the dimensionality of the observation space (i.e., the number of features); and 3) the dimensionality of the parameter space (i.e., the number of parameters). 23 0.5 1.0 C2ST                                                            

> Gauss. Linear Gauss. Mixture Two Moons SLCP Bernoulli GLM SIR Lotka Volterra 10 210 310 410 5Num. sim. 0.0 0.1 0.2 SBC [EoD]
> 10 210 310 410 5Num. sim.
> 10 210 310 410 5Num. sim.
> 10 210 310 410 5Num. sim.
> 10 210 310 410 5Num. sim.
> 10 210 310 410 5Num. sim.
> 10 210 310 410 5Num. sim.
> NPE NLE NRE NPE-PFN NPE (Ensemble)

## abFigure D-2: Extended SBI benchmark results for amortized NPE-PFN. (a) Extension of Fig. 2a with more baseline methods, namely NRE and NPE (Ensemble). (b) Mean absolute error between the calibration curves and the diagonal (EoD), with 0 indicating perfect calibration. Full calibration curves in Fig. D-3. 0.0 1.0 100                  

> Gauss. Linear Gauss. Mixture Two Moons SLCP Bernoulli GLM SIR Lotka Volterra 0.0 1.0 1000
> 0.0 1.0 10000
> 0.0 1.0
> α
> 0.0 1.0 100000
> 0.0 1.0
> α
> 0.0 1.0
> α
> 0.0 1.0
> α
> 0.0 1.0
> α
> 0.0 1.0
> α
> 0.0 1.0
> α
> NRE NLE NPE-PFN NPE NPE (Ensemble)

Figure D-3: Full calibration curves for all tasks. For each task (columns) and each simulation budget (rows), we plot the associated mean calibration curve (bold) as well as 3 individual runs (transparent, thin). 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5Num. sim. 0.5 1.0 C2ST         

> Gauss. Linear Gauss. Mixture Two Moons SLCP Bernoulli GLM SIR Lotka Volterra NPE NPE-PFN NPE (Sweep)

Figure D-4: SBI benchmark results with NPE hyperparameter optimization. C2ST for NPE-PFN, NPE with default settings, and NPE (Sweep), where hyperparameter optimization was performed. Specifically flow and optimization hyperparameters are optimized separately for each benchmark task and simulation budget using ten hours of random search. 24 Here, we provide a thorough examination of the inference speed of NPE-PFN across different simulation budgets and varying dimensionalities of the parameter and observation spaces (Tab. D-2). All results were obtained using an Nvidia A100 GPU. In general, as the value of any of the three parameters increases, inference becomes slower. The dimensionality of the parameter space has the strongest impact on overall inference speed, since the autoregressive use of TabPFN necessitates the reprocessing of the adapted context for each additional parameter dimension. For the largest parameter and observation dimensions and a context of 10 4 simulations, inference can take several minutes. However, this can be alleviated by filtering; for example, by selecting the 10 3 most relevant simulations (see Sec. D.6 for details). Table D-2: Inference speed of NPE-PFN. Inference speed to sample a batch of 10 4 samples from the posterior measured in seconds (on an Nvidia A100 GPU). Rows show increasing dimensionality of the parameter space, columns show increasing dimensionality of the observation space, stratified by different simulation budgets.                                                                                                

> 10 2Sim. 10 3Sim. 10 4Sim.
> θx
> 24816 32 24816 32 24816 32 264567765987810 14 23
> 411 10 10 11 13 10 11 11 13 17 15 19 24 32 48
> 819 23 22 27 30 23 23 24 27 35 35 40 49 66 101
> 16 45 47 47 53 63 49 52 54 61 77 89 99 116 152 221
> 32 97 103 107 122 137 115 116 125 141 171 251 272 307 370 516

D.4 Embedding networks for high-dimensional data 

We evaluate the performance of NPE-PFN-Infomax on high-dimensional simulation-based inference tasks, specifically focusing on a spatial SIR model [ 16 ] and an extended Lotka-Volterra task [ 94 ]. In the case of the spatial SIR task, where the true posterior is intractable, we rely on indirect metrics such as negative log-likelihood (NLL), TARP [ 95 ], and SBC for evaluation. NPE-PFN-Infomax leverages compressed embeddings learned via an infomax objective to distill key information from high-dimensional observations, which are then used as inputs to NPE-PFN. For the spatial SIR task, we employ a 2D CNN with four convolutional layers consisting of 16, 32, 64, and 128 channels, each with a kernel size of 5 and max pooling of size 2. The resulting feature maps are flattened and passed through a two-layer MLP to produce a 10-dimensional summary statistic. For the extended Lotka-Volterra task (300-dimensional time series), we adopt a similar architecture using a 1D CNN with a kernel size of 3 and an output embedding of 16 dimensions. Our results (Fig. D-5) indicate that such embedding networks—whether pre-trained or jointly trained— can be used to extend the applicability of NPE-PFN to high-dimensional observations. However, in most cases, this approach does not outperform an end-to-end trained NPE baseline. Interestingly, TabPFN without an embedding network (when applicable) often achieves better performance, sug-gesting that the compression step, independent of NPE-PFN, may be suboptimal. One possible explanation is that TabPFN, having been trained on causally structured data, can exploit underlying dependencies to improve inference accuracy. In contrast, compressing such highly structured data into low-dimensional summaries may discard critical information, limiting the effectiveness of inference. 

D.5 Comparison of autoregressive and ratio-based density evaluation 

In Sec. 2.4, we present a method for fast density evaluation based on density ratios, requiring only a single forward pass through the TabPFN classifier. While this approach offers a substantial computational advantage, it is inherently approximate, raising the question of how it compares to the autoregressive density evaluation. To answer this question, we compare the two methods on two tasks—the 2D Two Moons tasks and the 10D Gaussian Linear task—across varying simulation budgets. In each case, we evaluate the density of posterior samples from the trained model given an observation, using 5 random seeds. To construct the dataset for the ratio estimator, we draw 5 · 10 3

samples each from the posterior of interest and the uniform base distribution, which is the default setting. 25 θ1 θ2                            

> −101
> θ3
> −101
> θ4
> True NPE-PFN NPE NPE-PFN-Infomax
> 10 310 410 5
> Num. sim. 0.5 1.0 C2ST
> Lotka-Volterra (long) 01NLL
> 0.15 0.20 TARP [EoD]  Spatial SIR [22x22] 0.0 0.1 SBC [EoD]
> 10 310 410 5
> Num. sim. 01NLL
> 10 310 410 5
> Num. sim. 0.15 0.20 TARP [EoD]  Spatial SIR [44x44]
> 10 310 410 5
> Num. sim. 0.0 0.1 SBC [EoD]
> observation posterior predictive

## a

## cbFigure D-5: High-dimensional data with embedding nets. (a) Visualization of observations in the spatial SIR task alongside posterior predictive samples obtained using NPE-PFN-Infomax. 

(b) Performance evaluation across high-dimensional variants of the spatial SIR task over 5 independent runs, reported in terms of the negative log-likelihood (NLL) of the true parameter and the area off the diagonal in TARP and SBC calibration analyses. (c) An instance of the Lotka-Volterra task with an extended time series (300 dimensions), evaluated using NPE-PFN and NPE-PFN-Infomax. 0 200 0200 400 ratio-based          

> 0200 autoregressive 020 ratio-based 0.50 0.75 1.00 corr(auto,ratio)
> 10 210 310 4Num. sim. 0.50 0.75 1.00 corr(auto,ratio)
> 10 1Time (sec)
> 10 20 Num. eval. 10 2Time (sec)
> auto ratio Two Moons Gaussian Linear

## a b cSample density Sample density corr. Repeated density eval. 

Figure D-6: Comparison of density evaluation approaches on Two Moons and Gaussian Linear task. (a) Correlation between density estimates from the autoregressive and ratio-based approaches for two observations using 10 4 simulations. (b) Pearson correlation between the two density estimates across varying simulation budgets for both tasks. (c) Evaluation time (log scale) for an increasing number of density evaluations using an Nvidia H100 GPU, showing the crossover point where the ratio-based approach becomes more efficient. 26 10 2 10 3 10 4N filter 0.5 1.0 C2ST       

> Gauss. Mixture Two Moons SLCP Gauss. Linear SIR Bernoulli GLM Lotka Volterra NPE-PFN

Figure D-7: SBI benchmark results with varying number of filtered simulations. C2ST perfor-mance of filtered NPE-PFN as a function of the number of filtered simulations Nfilter . For all tasks, a simulation budget of 10 5 is used. The red cross marks the default choice of Nfilter = 10 4.We observe a strong correlation between autoregressive and ratio-based density evaluations for the Two Moons task and a somewhat weaker correlation for the higher-dimensional Gaussian Linear task (Fig. D-6a for a simulation budget of 10 4). This trend persists across simulation budgets (Fig. D-6b). In terms of runtime, the ratio-based method has an initial cost due to posterior sampling, making it slower for the first evaluation. However, once samples are obtained, subsequent evaluations are significantly faster—an advantage that becomes very noticeable as the number of density evaluations increases (Fig. D-6c; note the logarithmic y-axis). Therefore, in scenarios that require repeated density evaluations for a single observation—such as rejection sampling in TSNPE-PFN—the ratio-based approach offers a highly favorable trade-off: It provides sufficient accuracy at a fraction of the computational cost. 

D.6 Varying the number of filtered simulations 

When filtering simulations, we always make full use of TabPFN’s recommended maximal context size of 10 5 data points. However, in principle, the number of simulations Nfilter selected by the filter is a hyperparameter that can be optimized. Here, we investigate the impact of this hyperparameter by evaluating the performance of NPE-PFN on the SBI benchmark tasks and a simulation budget of 10 5.Specifically, we vary the number of filtered simulations Nfilter , setting it to 16, 64, 256, 1024, 2048, 4096, and 16384, and compare the resulting performance to our default choice of 10 4.For small values of Nfilter , the performance of NPE-PFN deteriorates across all tasks (Fig. D-7). In contrast, for Nfilter = 1024 or larger, performance is very similar to that of our default choice with 

10 5 simulations. For some tasks, a slight decrease in performance is observed for the largest value of 

Nfilter , likely because this exceeds the recommended context size of TabPFN. Importantly, our default choice is always optimal or near-optimal. These results suggest that the recommended maximal context should be utilized fully. Nevertheless, these results also indicate that good performance can be achieved with smaller filter sizes (e.g., Nfilter = 2048 ) to reduce the computational load. 

D.7 Varying feature and noise distributions 

Here, we investigate the robustness of NPE-PFN to different types of noise. To evaluate the robustness in such cases, we construct a variant of the Gaussian linear task from Lueckmann et al. [27] with non-Gaussian features and noise 

θ ∼ pfeat (θ), (D-8) 

x ∼ θ + pnoise (x | θ). (D-9) Both pfeat (θ) and pnoise (x | θ) are chosen from a set of distributions with varying support and tail behavior: • Cauchy distribution Cauchy (0 , s ),• Laplace distribution Laplace (0 , s ),• Logitnormal distribution σ(N (0 , s 2)) with σ(x) = 11+ e−x ,• Normal distribution N (0 , s 2),• Student’s t-distribution t5 · s where t5 represents a Student’s t-distribution with 5 degrees of freedom, 27 cauchy laplace logitnormal normal studentt Noise Dist. cauchy laplace logitnormal normal studentt Feature Dist.  NPE              

> cauchy laplace logitnormal normal studentt Noise Dist. NPE-PFN
> 0.50 0.75 1.00
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 1.00 scale(x)=1.0 C2ST
> 5 dims. 10 dims.
> 10 210 3210 ⋅3Num. sim.
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 1.00 scale(x)=2.0 C2ST
> 10 210 3210 ⋅3Num. sim.
> Laplace Features, Cauchy Noise NPE NPE-PFN scale (noise)=1.0 scale (noise)=2.0

## a b

> C2ST

Figure D-8: Robustness to feature and noise distributions. (a) Heatmaps showing C2ST perfor-mance for all combinations of feature and noise distributions with dim (θ) = 5 , s = 1 .0, and 10 3

training simulations. White cells indicate failed training. (b) C2ST across training set sizes for an example combination of distributions. These panels are zoom-ins from (a), highlighting the stability of NPE-PFN under varying distributional assumptions. where s is the scale parameter. We vary the feature dimension, the scale of feature and noise distributions, and the number of training simulations, and compare the performance of NPE-PFN against NPE. We first evaluate performance via C2ST across all combinations of feature and noise distributions for sfeatures = snoise = 1 .0, dim (θ) = 5 , and 10 3 simulations. The heatmap shows that NPE-PFN outperforms NPE consistently, with while cells indicating training failure primarily for NPE (Fig. D-8a). For the example of Laplace feature and Cauchy noise distributions, we provide results as a function of simulation budget, confirming the robustness of NPE-PFN across distributional shifts (Fig. D-8b). Notably, while NPE achieves performance drops on several non-Gaussian configurations, NPE-PFN maintains stable performance. These results suggest that, although TabPFN is pre-trained using priors based on structural causal models (SCMs) with uniform or Gaussian root noise, nonlinear transformations in the SCM induce rich marginal distributions and allow generalization to a wide range of distributions. NPE-PFN inherits this robustness, and its performance is largely invariant to different feature or noise distributions. Failures of NPE, especially with Cauchy features, are caused by instability in z-scoring, which NPE-PFN avoids through default preprocessing such as the Yeo–Johnson transform [ 96 ]. Thus, standard NPE performance could probably be improved by applying appropriate transformations. Because NPE-PFN takes advantage of the automatic preprocessing performed within TabPFN, it provides reliable performance without manual preprocessing, making it a robust and user-friendly solution in practical settings. 

D.8 Order of autoregressive sampling 

To sample from multi-dimensional (conditional) distributions with TabPFN, we use it in an autore-gressive manner. An important question is whether the order in which we sample the dimensions matters for, e.g., the quality of the inferred posterior distributions. To investigate this question, we rerun NPE-PFN on the benchmark tasks from Sec. 3.1, but permute the order in which we sample the parameter dimensions. Two of the seven benchmark tasks are permutation invariant by design (Gaussian Mixture and Gaussian Linear), and we replace these with tasks where a distribution is constructed autoregressively. The first is a simple nonlinear task given by 

[x1, x 2] ∼ N (0 , 1) , (D-10) 

y1 ∼ N (x1, 1) , (D-11) 

y2 | y1 ∼ N (sin( y1 + x2), 1) , (D-12) 

y3 | y1, y 2 ∼ N (y22 + y1, 1) , (D-13) 

y4 | y1, y 2, y 3 ∼ N (y1y2 + y3, 1) . (D-14) 28 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5Num. sim. 0.5 1.0 C2ST                                                  

> 10 210 310 410 5Num. sim.
> 10 210 310 410 5Num. sim. 0.5 1.0
> 10 210 310 410 5Num. sim.
> 10 210 310 410 5Num. sim.
> 10 210 310 410 5Num. sim.
> 10 210 310 410 5Num. sim.
> permuted default Simple nonlin. Mixed dis. Two Moons SLCP Bernoulli GLM SIR Lotka Volterra

Figure D-9: Autoregressive ordering. C2ST across varying simulation budgets for two additional synthetic tasks, and five tasks from the SBI benchmark that are not permutation invariant. Blue lines indicate the average C2ST accuracy over three seeds for up to ten (random) permutations of the sampling order. Dashed orange lines indicate the default order. The second is a mixed distribution task, given by 

x = [ x1, x 2] ∼ U (−2, 2) , (D-15) 

y1 ∼ Gamma (shape = 1 + |x1|, scale = 1) , (D-16) 

y2 | y1 ∼ Uniform (0 , y 1 · 2 + |x2|), (D-17) 

y3 | y1, y 2 ∼ Beta (α = 1 + y1, β = 2 + y2). (D-18) As in Sec. 3.1, we compute the C2ST with respect to the ground truth for evaluation. We run NPE-PFN for the default autoregressive order (as defined in the SBI benchmark or in the equations above) and up to ten (random) permutations over three random seeds. Note that tasks with two or three dimensions have only two or six possible permutations, respectively (including the default one), so random subsampling is not required. Across all benchmark tasks and simulation budgets, NPE-PFN achieves nearly identical performance across the default and permuted orders (Fig. D-9). That is, for these benchmark tasks, the performance of NPE-PFN is not affected by permuting dimensions. These results show that NPE-PFN is not sensitive to the order in which the parameters are sampled. As a result, users need not worry about providing NPE-PFN with an “optimal” order. While differences in performance may be possible for very high dimensions or artificial examples, for the applications we consider here, an arbitrary permutation is sufficient. 

D.9 Unconditional density estimation on the UCI datasets 

Here, we apply TabPFN on some classical unconditional density estimation benchmark tasks from the UCI repository [ 56 ] as used in several other works [ 41 , 42 , 97 ]. Note that while we still perform density estimation here, it does not involve posterior distributions. Thus, we do not refer to this approach as NPE-PFN. Specifically, we consider the Gas, Power, Hepmass, and Miniboone datasets. These tabular datasets range in dimensionality from 6 to 43 features and contain between 3.1 · 10 4

and over 1 million samples. We here investigate the unconditional density estimation performance of TabPFN in the low sample regime in comparison to a neural spline flow (NSF) [ 42 ]. As in previous works, we compute the negative log-likelihood (NLL) under a held-out test set. While we evaluate on the full test sets, we only use 10 3, 10 4, or (if applicable) 10 5 samples for training. For the two larger settings, we use partitioning (Sec. B.4) with 10 clusters when estimating densities with TabPFN. For 10 2 and 10 3 samples, TabPFN achieves a smaller negative log-likelihood on all four datasets (Fig. D-10). Similarly, for the 10 4 samples, TabPFN outperforms NSF on all but the power dataset. Interestingly, for the lower dimensional datasets, clustering further reduces the NLL despite having access to the same total number of samples. On the other hand, for the higher dimensional datasets, clustering increases the NLL. For 10 5 samples (or 3.1 · 10 4 samples for the Miniboone dataset), clustering improves the NLL over any 10 4 sample setting because it allows TabPFN to access a larger number of samples. However, NSF performs better than or equal to TabPFN on all datasets except the Gas dataset at 10 5 samples. These results suggest that TabPFN is a capable (unconditional) density estimator, especially in the low sample regime. 29 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5Number of samples                         

> −10
> −505NLL
> Gas NSF TabPFN, 1 cluster TabPFN, 10 clusters 10 210 310 410 5Number of samples 024
> Power 10 210 310 410 5Number of samples 20 25 30
> Hepmass 10 210 310 4310 ⋅4Number of samples 20 40 60
> Miniboone

Figure D-10: Results for unconditional density estimation on the UCI datasets. Negative-log-likelihood (NLL) for TabPFN (with 1 and 10 clusters) and the neural spline flow (NSF) across the different UCI datasets. Dots indicate averages, and bars show standard deviation over five independent runs. 30 Obs. 1 Obs. 2 Obs. 3 Obs. 4 Obs. 5 Obs. 6 Obs. 7 Obs. 8 Obs. 9 Obs. 10 Figure D-11: Posterior predictives of TSNPE-PFN for real observations from the Allen cell type database and a simulation budget of 10 4. Note that the inference is not performed directly on the action potential time series but on seven summary statistics computed from it. 31 Obs. 1 Obs. 2 Obs. 3 Obs. 4 Obs. 5 Obs. 6 Obs. 7 Obs. 8 Obs. 9 Obs. 10 Figure D-12: Posterior predictives of the TSNPE baseline for real observations from the Allen cell type database and a simulation budget of 10 4. Note that the inference is not performed directly on the action potential time series but on seven summary statistics computed from it. 32 0.0 500 AB-Na 

0.0 7AB-CaT 

0.0 8AB-CaS 

0.0 60 AB-A 

0.0 15 AB-KCa 

25 150 AB-Kd 

0.0 0.0 AB-H 

0.0 0.01 AB-leak 

0.0 200 LP-Na 

0.0 2LP-CaT 

2 12 LP-CaS 

10 60 LP-A 

0.0 10 LP-KCa 

0.0 125 LP-Kd 

0.0 0.1 LP-H 

0.0 0.0 LP-leak 

0.0 600 PY-Na 

0.0 12 PY-CaT 

0.0 4PY-CaS 

30 60 PY-A 

0.0 5PY-KCa 

50 150 PY-Kd 

0.0 0.1 PY-H 

0.0 0.1 PY-leak 

0.01 10000 AB − LP 

0.01 1000 PD − LP 

0.01 1000 AB − PY 

0.01 1000 PD − PY 

0.01 1000 LP − PD 

0.01 1000 LP − PY 

0.01 1000 PY − LP Figure D-13: Pyloric simulator. Posterior distributions for all 31 parameters estimated by TSNPE-PFN. 33 NeurIPS Paper Checklist 

1. Claims 

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We clearly state the methodological and empirical contributions of our work: We introduce NPE-PF, a training-fee inference method that uses the pre-trained TabPFN v2 tabular foundation model for SBI. We demonstrate its advantages in accuracy and simulation efficiency on synthetic benchmark tasks and real-world tasks. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper. • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers. • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings. • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper. 2. Limitations 

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes] Justification: In the final section, we explicitly discuss the limitations of our approach, including the constraints imposed by TabPFN, such as context size limitation, scalability, and computational cost. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper. • The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper. • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be. • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated. • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon. • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size. • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness. • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations. 3. Theory assumptions and proofs 

34 Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof? Answer: [NA] Justification: Our work is methodologically and empirically driven. Thus, it does not contain significant formal theoretical results. Instead, we validate the method through extensive empirical evaluation on both synthetic benchmark tasks and real-world tasks. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results. • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced. • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems. • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition. • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material. • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced. 4. Experimental result reproducibility 

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We detail all components necessary for our results, including simulation setup, model configuration, and evaluation metrics, in appropriate subsections for each experiment within the appendix. In addition, we provide our code to reproduce all experiments. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not. • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable. • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed. • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm. (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully. (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset). 35 (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results. 5. Open access to data and code 

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We share the code and provide detailed instructions on how to use our method. The datasets we use are publicly available, and we include instructions for using the data in the code. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code. • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark). • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc. • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why. • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable). • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted. 6. Experimental setting/details 

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We report all relevant experimental details, including simulator setups, simula-tion budgets, and hyperparameters, in the appendix. Reproducible configuration files are included in the code repository to ensure transparency and applicability. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them. • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material. 7. Experiment statistical significance 

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments? Answer: [Yes] 36 Justification: We report the standard deviation over independent runs with different random seeds. The number of independent runs is given for each experiment. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper. • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions). • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.) • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors). • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean. • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified. • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates). • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text. 8. Experiments compute resources 

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: In the Appendix, we describe the computational resources used for our experi-ments, including hardware specifications. For the experiments, we report the runtime, e.g., for the SBI benchmark tasks for comparison with baseline methods. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage. • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper). 9. Code of ethics 

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?Answer: [Yes] Justification: We confirm that this work conforms to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics in all aspects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. • If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics. • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction). 37 10. Broader impacts 

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed? Answer: [NA] Justification: Our work introduces a methodological advance in simulation-based inference using pre-trained foundation models. While it allows for more efficient inference in scientific settings, potentially enabling scientific advances, we do not target applications with direct societal impact and do not foresee immediate potential for misuse. Regarding the use of pre-trained foundation models, the model we use, TabPFN, has been pre-trained on synthetic datasets only. Thus, there is no personal data involved that could bias the output of our method. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed. • If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact. • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations. • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster. • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology. • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML). 11. Safeguards 

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)? Answer: [NA] Justification: The work is methodological and empirical. Therefore, we do not see a high risk of misuse. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks. • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters. • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images. • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort. 12. Licenses for existing assets 

38 Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We credit all external assets in our work, including datasets. Licenses for models, simulators, and datasets are properly respected and appropriately cited. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets. • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL. • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset. • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided. • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets 

has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset. • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided. • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators. 13. New assets 

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We provide the code for our method with documentation on how to run it. No other assets are introduced. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets. • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc. • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used. • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file. 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects 

Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)? Answer: [NA] Justification: This work does not involve any crowdsourcing or research with human experts. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper. • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector. 39 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects 

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained? Answer: [NA] Justification: No human subjects were involved in this study, and no new data involving human participants were collected or analyzed. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper. • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution. • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review. 16. Declaration of LLM usage 

Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required. Answer: [NA] Justification: The core methodology and contributions of this work do not involve the use of large language models. LLMs were not used in the development, implementation, or evaluation of the proposed method according to the NeurIPS LLM policy. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. • Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM )for what should or should not be described. 40