Title: 4D Parallelism Unlocks Exascale Bayesian Neural Networks for High-Fidelity Atmospheric Modeling

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.12815v1

Published Time: Mon, 14 Sep 2026 01:23:48 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
> 1

# 4D Parallelism Unlocks Exascale Bayesian Neural Networks for High-Fidelity Atmospheric Modeling 

Deifilia Kieckhefen 1†, Juan Pedro Guti´ errez Hermosillo Muriedas 1†, Lars Helge Heyen 1, Mathis Bode 2, Iida Hakulinen 3, Andreas Herten 2, Chelsea Maria John 2, Thorsten Kurth 4, Anni Moisala 3, Asena Karolin ¨ Ozdemir 1,Kaleb Phipps 1, Oskar Taubert 3, Arvid Weyrauch 1, Markus G¨ otz 1, and Charlotte Debus 11Karlsruhe Institute for Technology, Germany 

2Forschungszentrum J¨ ulich, Germany 

3CSC – IT Center for Science Ltd., Finnland 

4NVIDIA, Switzerland 

Abstract —We present BEAST, the first-ever Bayesian Swin Transformer for atmospheric forecasting on 0.25° global reso-lution able to accurately quantify both aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty. To overcome the associated computational bottle-necks, we devise an orthogonal 4D-parallelization scheme that introduces a unique domain-tensor-parallelism strategy and a novel uncertainty parallel method, enabling us to fully leverage GPU capacity and efficiently scale model training. For a 2.4-billion-parameter model, we achieve a peak performance of 3.96 EFLOP/s on 20 480 NVIDIA GH200 GPUs on the JUPITER supercomputer. We train BEAST as a 700-million-parameter model with 96 random weight samples on 384 nodes on 40 years of data for nearly one million gradient updates. This model achieves predictive skill scores competitive with state-of-the-art probabilistic atmospheric AI models and numerical models, and can predict extreme events with exceptional skill, while generating large ensembles 3 to 4 times faster than the current-best AI model. Our contribution unlocks the potential of high-fidelity uncertainty quantification in atmospheric AI models, heralding a new era for AI-based models in climate and Earth system sciences. 

Index Terms —Atmospheric Forecasting, Uncertainty Quan-tification, Exascale Computing, Artificial Intelligence, Domain Parallelism, Sampling Parallelism 

I. O VERVIEW 

Artificial intelligence (AI) models for atmospheric forecast-ing are revolutionizing weather and climate sciences, owing to their promise of generating predictions with skill scores competitive to numerical models at a fraction of the compu-tational resources. Current atmospheric AI models learn a set of point-value (scalar) weights through iterative optimization over a finite dataset. However, this approach disregards the fact that the results of the optimization process can be ambiguous, meaning that the weights could also have different numeric values. From a modeling point of view, this corresponds to the epistemic uncertainty of the model – a systematic error originating from the incompleteness of the training datasets. The uncertainty in the model weights is dependent on the size and quality of the dataset: the more accurately the training dataset represents the true data distribution of the modeled 

> †

These authors contributed equally. Corresponding author: C. Debus (charlotte.debus@kit.edu) 

problem, the more certain the weights are and the better the prediction becomes. For atmospheric AI models, this has two direct consequences. For one, the prediction of rare weather phenomena, such as extreme events, is challenging, as they are sparsely represented in the training data, or not at all. Second, the prediction quality is directly coupled to the size of the dataset [1], as more data items typically provide a better approximation of the true data distribution. Hence, modeling rare physical processes of Earth system components for which only small-sized datasets are available remains difficult. After the recent successes in AI-based weather forecasting with deterministic large-scale neural networks [2, 3, 4, 5], probabilistic models for quantifying the uncertainty of a pre-diction have become the next frontier. Current approaches to uncertainty quantification in AI models focus on the uncer-tainty of the atmospheric input state to generate ensemble forecasts, similar to ensemble generation via input perturbation in numerical models, as used for HENS [6, 7]. In particular, diffusion-based methods like GenCast [8], functional gener-ative networks (FGN) [9], FourCastNet3 (FCN3) [10], and AIFS-CRPS [11] have achieved impressive results. However, these existing approaches capture only the so-called aleatoric 

uncertainty, which stems from the inherent chaotic nature of the physical processes in the atmosphere. In contrast, modeling 

epistemic uncertainty in atmospheric AI models has received little attention so far. FGN and HENS approximate Bayesian inference with deep ensembles [12, 13], i.e., training multiple models from independently randomly initialized parameters; however, a probabilistic model formulation that captures both epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty has not yet been realized. Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) provide a principled framework for modeling epistemic uncertainty. BNNs extend classical neural networks by replacing the scalar weights with probability distributions, thereby transforming point predic-tions into predictive distributions. Compared to alternative methods, like input perturbation or diffusion, BNNs offer a more comprehensive and theoretically grounded approach to uncertainty estimation, leading to better-calibrated and more informative ensemble predictions [14]. The distributional pa-rameterization of BNN weights allows for distribution tails to be better captured, leading to more accurate predictions of arXiv:2609.12815v1 [physics.ao-ph] 11 Sep 2026 2

extreme events. Moreover, BNNs can be trained to competitive prediction accuracy on much less data compared to their deterministic (non-Bayesian) counterparts, owing to their ca-pability of accounting for the under-representation of the data distribution in small training datasets [15]. Hence, they have great potential for AI-based modeling of other components of the Earth system, where training data is much scarcer. However, training BNNs requires significantly more com-putational resources than training standard neural networks. For one, the probabilistic parameterization of network weights effectively doubles the number of parameters that must be learned, increasing the GPU memory requirements of model training. Second, each forward pass on a data batch has to be performed on a set of random weight samples drawn from the current weight distribution, and the resulting predictions, i.e., the ensemble, have to be aggregated for the backward pass. Evaluation of multiple samples per data item linearly increases computational cost and memory demand. For large-scale atmospheric models with hundreds of millions to billions of parameters, these costs become prohibitive. As a result, large-scale implementations of BNNs in this domain have not yet been realized to date. We set out to break this barrier and realize the first-ever Bayesian model for atmospheric forecasting at global 0.25° resolution. We strategically accelerate model training at all scales, from optimizing single-node performance by leverag-ing lower precision data types, just-in-time compilation, and fast GPU-to-GPU communication, to minimizing inter-node communication necessary for Bayesian model training. This allows training of a 2.4-billion-parameter Bayesian Shifted Window (Swin) Transformer for 12 h and 24 h forecasts at a peak performance of 3.96 EFLOP/s on 5120 nodes on the JUPITER supercomputer. II. S TATE OF THE ART 

Regardless of the application, parallelism and scalability are paramount to enabling the training of large-scale models. The conventional way of accelerating training is data parallelism 

(DP) [16, 17], where each process holds a copy of the model weights, independently performs a forward–backward pass of its local subset of the dataset, and computes the correspond-ing gradients. The gradients are then averaged through an 

allreduce operation, and the weights are updated locally. The number of iterations required for an epoch can be reduced by increasing the number of data-parallel processes to increase the global batch size. While data parallelism scales well in a computational manner, having large global batch sizes can cause models to generalize poorly, ultimately limiting scalability [18]. Recent work on AI models in weather and climate science has focused extensively on so-called foundation models, i.e., very large models that are pre-trained in a self-supervised fashion on large heterogeneous datasets, and subsequently fine-tuned for downstream tasks [19, 20, 21]. In consequence, model sizes have been growing dramatically beyond the billion-parameter mark. The affirmation of neural scaling laws for AI weather models [1], stating that predictive skill improves with quadratically more data and weights, further fuels this trend. As growing model sizes quickly exceed the memory limitations of a single GPU, the field of model parallelism has emerged to distribute model weights and associated computations across multiple GPUs. There exist multiple forms of model parallelism, as there are different ways (axes) to parallelize the model architec-ture. The simplest form of model parallelism is pipeline parallelism , where sequential stages, i.e., blocks of layers, are distributed across GPUs [22]. While pipeline parallelism circumvents the GPU-memory bottleneck and entails simple communication schemes with only point-to-point operations, the inherent sequentiality of running through the network layers in the forward-backward pass causes GPU idle time, precluding efficient GPU utilization. Another drawback of pipeline parallelism is the necessity to perform asynchronous gradient updates, which degrades predictive performance [23]. An orthogonal approach to pipeline parallelism is tensor parallelism , i.e., distributing the weight matrices of each layer across multiple GPUs. Megatron-LM [24] was among the first works to utilize tensor parallelism, efficiently enabling the training of multi-billion-parameter Transformer models by parallelizing across attention heads and feed-forward weight matrices. In Transformer models specifically, the quadratic complexity in sequence length of the attention mechanism provides a particular computational burden and memory bot-tleneck for long sequence lengths. This is oftentimes addressed with sequence parallelism [25]. Next to the memory demand of the large weight matrices themselves, the associated gradients and optimizer states can also lead to a severe memory bottleneck. To deal with this, hybrid data–model-parallel approaches have been introduced, such as Zero Redundancy Optimizer (ZeRO) [26] or Fully Sharded Data Parallelism (FSDP) [27]. ZeRO partitions the parameters, activations, and optimizer states across GPUs, and uses allgather operations to reconstruct each layer upon demand. The approach achieves superlinear scaling due to reduced memory footprints. FSDP shards data batches and model parameters. In a given layer, the weights are gathered to compute the full activations. Afterward, the unnecessary activations are discarded to reduce the memory footprint. The main memory bottleneck for training large language models (LLMs) originates from large weight matrices; in contrast, Vision-Transformer (ViT)-like architectures with long sequence lengths ( ≈ 10 6) face a different challenge: large activation memory footprints. While this can be mitigated by techniques such as gradient offloading to the CPU [26, 28] or gradient recomputation [29], these strategies can come at the cost of computational performance. Thus, novel parallelization strategies are required to address the significant bottlenecks arising from the size of the data items. As one of the first works in the field, FourCastNet v1 [4] employed tensor parallelism on its Adaptive Fourier Neural Operator (AFNO) architecture by applying feature parallelism, splitting the fast Fourier transforms across processes. It also distributes the multi-layer perceptron (MLP) at the end of an AFNO block, sharding model parameters in alternating row and column dimensions. The approach enables scaling up to 3

3808 NVIDIA A100 GPUs, attaining 140.8 PFLOP/s in mixed precision, which amounts to 11.9 % of peak performance [4]. ORBIT [30] used a ViT [31], trained on global 1.4° resolu-tion with up to 91 channels, and scaled beyond the 1-billion-parameter model size. ORBIT introduces Hybrid-STOP, which fully shards the model’s weights as well as data batches, thus combining tensor parallelism and FSDP. Additionally, communication is optimized by using layer wrapping, i.e., overlapping computation and prefetching of subsequent model layers. Through these means, they train a model with up to 113 billion parameters across 49 152 GPUs. ORBIT-2 performs a spatial downscaling task, parallelized through the TILES approach [32]. In TILES, the spatial dimension is divided into overlapping spatial tiles, upon which each GPU calculates local attention. With their biggest model of 10B parameters, they achieve a sustained computational throughput of 368 PFLOP/s on 512 nodes (2048 GH200 GPUs) on the Alps system. AERIS [33] scales training of a Swin-Transformer-based [34] diffusion model with 1 × 1 patch embedding up to 10 080 nodes and utilizes data, pipeline, and Sequence-Window (SWiPe) parallelism. SWiPe partitions the image across windows, and further parallelizes the sequence within each window with DeepSpeed Ulysses’s sequence paral-lelism [25]. Their biggest model (80B parameters) reaches 10.21 EFLOP/s on 10 080 nodes of the Aurora system, cor-responding to roughly 10 forecasts per second. III. I NNOVATIONS 

Our main innovations overcome the challenges in training large Bayesian neural networks by introducing a 4-dimensional parallelization strategy to alleviate memory bottlenecks and to maximize per-evaluation throughput. The architecture for our Bayesian Exascale Atmospheric Swin Transformer (BEAST) features a 2D-Swin Trans-former [34] with one down- and up-sampling layer. We train BEAST according to the Bayesian model formulation 

p(y∗ | x∗, D) = 

Z

p(y∗ | x∗, w) p(w | D ) dw

where D is the training data, w are the model weights, x∗

is the input and y∗ is the output. The exact computation of the posterior p(w | D ) is generally intractable. To circumvent this, variational inference [35, 36] approximates the posterior by a known parameterized distributional family q. The mean-field assumption uses an independent Gaussian distribution for each weight, and assumes the parameters θ = {μ, σ} to be independent for each of the weights to make computation feasible. During training, the parameters θ are optimized towards minimizing the Kullback-Leibler divergence ( KL ) [37] be-tween the variational distribution q and the ideal weight distribution p. This is encoded by the evidence lower bound (ELBO )

ELBO = EW ∼q [log p(Y |X, W )] 

| {z }

> data fitting

− λ KL ( q|| p)

| {z }

> prior matching

where p(Y |X, W ) is the probability of the training labels according to the model given the training data and weights, which are sampled from the variational distribution for the expected value, and λ is an optional “cold posterior” hyper-parameter factor [38]. Figure 1 outlines how we take advantage of multiple parallelization axes within our implementation of BEAST to circumvent the complexity and memory requirements inherent to the model. 

A. Domain–Tensor Parallelism 

Our first optimization target is to reduce per-GPU memory footprint. With a single data item, i.e., atmospheric input state, being several hundred megabytes large, current state-of-the-art AI models for atmospheric forecasting struggle to go beyond the 1-billion-parameter mark [30]. Accordingly, a significant proportion of the available GPU memory is consumed by data items and corresponding activations. In the Bayesian formulation, this problem becomes even more pronounced, as the memory demand of a BNN compared to a deterministic model is increased proportionally to 1) the number of parameters used to parameterize the distribution of each model weight (two in our case); and 2) the number of samples drawn—and thus, forward passes through the model and associated activations—per data item. Existing strategies for model parallelization are designed for training LLMs and thus prioritize maximizing the model size through tensor and pipeline parallelism. Long sequence lengths are handled by sharding the input data along the sequence dimension with context parallelism. Scientific image-based applications are much larger in terms of sequence lengths (order of 1 million) with the number of input variables in the order of 100. The latent representations of the channels are projected to a larger embedding space; thus, sharding of the data along both the sequence and channel dimensions holds the biggest potential in alleviating memory bottlenecks. We pursue this approach of domain parallelism and combine it with tensor parallelism for all neural network layers. That means that, in contrast to existing parallelization schemes, our approach distributes not only the model parameter and optimizer states, but also shards each input data item along both the spatial and channel dimensions. We leverage dis-tributed matrix multiplications to implement this domain– tensor parallelization (DTP) scheme [39]. By sharding both the data and weights and formulating a linear layer as a distributed matrix multiplication, we are able to parallelize in-dividual and arbitrary layers without the need for allgather 

operations or re-sharding, simultaneously maximizing GPU memory usage and reducing the data I/O-workload. We define a DTP instance over a GPU grid of [ c channels, 

s spatial] ranks, where each rank loads [1 /c × 1/s ] fraction of each data item and holds [1 /c ] of the model weights. Ranks within the same spatial group hold the same copy of the model weights, i.e., they compute on different data shards and are domain-parallel only. The parameters of the spatial groups are synchronized by allreduce operations of the gradients. Ranks within the same channel group are fully domain- and tensor-parallel. 4        

> Domain–Tensor-Parallelism (DTP) DTP instance GPU 1 GPU 2 GPU 3 GPU 4
> Spatial parallel Channel parallel
> p
> Uncertainty-Parallelism (UP) UP instance DTP 1 DTP 2 DTP 3 DTP 4
> Aleatoric / noise injection
> Data-Parallelism (DP) DP instance UP 1 UP 2 UP 3 UP 4
> Data parallel
> ERA5 Hourly Data
> Time frame: 1979–2019 Format: zarr, chunked in time and space
> 
> W1,1 · · · · · · W1, m
> .... . ........ . ....
> Wn,1 · · · · · · Wn,m
> 
> Tensor parallel
> p
> Epistemic / weight sampling

Fig. 1: Schematic of BEAST’s 4D parallelization hierarchy from left to right. Domain-Tensor-Parallelism (DTP) decomposes inputs across spatial and channel dimensions. Uncertainty-Parallelism (UP) runs independent aleatoric noise injections and epistemic weight samplings. Data-Parallelism (DP) processes separate, non-overlapping ERA5 data chunks in parallel. We apply this concept to all neural network layer types in BEAST. Convolutions are performed by distributing the filters across the channel groups. Each rank computes the local convolutions and exchanges the necessary input data with the remaining ranks in the channel to resolve the full convolution. A schematic of the parallelization strategy used in channel-parallel attention layers is shown in Figure 2. The query–key–value (QKV) map in each attention layer is computed by a distributed linear layer across the channels. Each rank then holds the local sequence and a fraction of the QKV embedding dimension. The attention calculation is then trivially parallelized across the heads, allowing us to leverage optimized single GPU attention kernels such as FlashAttention-2 [40] or cuDNNs fused dot product attention via NVIDIA’s Transformer Engine library [41] without any ad-ditional communication, while maintaining domain parallelism across channels on the input to the Transformer block. Head concatenation and the subsequent MLP are again performed by distributed layers, combining the information across the channel shards. The windows are shifted between every Trans-former block by half a window, and halos are communicated between the ranks in spatial groups where necessary. 

B. Uncertainty Parallelism 

Next, we target the challenge of evaluating the m forward passes of the random weight samples for each data item by introducing sampling parallelism [42]. We extend the GPU grid of [ c channels, s spatial] ranks by an orthogonal parallelization axis with u groups, along which we distribute the m random weight samples. That means that we have u

DTP instances, each holding a full model on c × s GPUs. Each of these model instances draws m/u independent random weight samples and performs the forward pass on them. To compute the mean and standard deviation of the ensem-ble, the sample predictions need to be aggregated: each rank computes the sum and squared sum of its local predictions, 

Su = Pmu 

> i=1

x(u) 

> i

and Qu = Pmu

> i=1



x(u)

> i

2

, respectively. 

Su and Qu are then aggregated across all u ranks in an 

allreduce operation to obtain the global sum and global square sum S = P 

> u

Su, Q = P 

> u

Qu. From these global sums, the global mean and global standard deviation of the predictions are computed. This allows us to reduce the commu-nication in the prediction aggregation to two tensors instead of all the m predictions from the local weight samples. Through sampling parallelism, we can efficiently increase the number of random weight samples per forward–backward pass, thereby improving prediction quality without being bound to the memory capacities of a single accelerator. Sampling parallelism provides an additional major advan-tage: the parallel evaluations of the random weight samples are all carried out on the same input data batch. They can there-fore be combined with data augmentation, which improves predictive generalization and training convergence [43]. While there are several data augmentation options from computer vision available, we chose a different route and used parallel data augmentation to include aleatoric uncertainty into our Bayesian model. We use a modification of conditional layer normaliza-tion [44], inspired by [9] (noise independent of spatial grid) and [11], which we coin noise input conditioning for ensem-bles (NICE). In each forward pass, a random vector ϵ of 32 

independent standard normal distributed values is drawn. The 

scale and shift parameters for each layer normalization are generated by shallow MLPs, with the noise ϵ as the input. This effectively injects noise into the model and can itself be used to produce ensemble outputs, thus making the model fully uncer-tainty aware. We call this combination of sampling parallelism with random noise injection uncertainty parallelism (UP). We handle the coordination of the data I/O within UP groups with 5    

> Input at time t
> Input at time t−∆t

+

> concat.
> Patch Embed.
> 2×2 Conv2D
> Swin Transformer Downsample
> 2×2 Conv2D
> Swin Transformer Upsample
> 2×2 Conv2DT
> Swin Transformer Patch Recov.
> 2×2 Conv2DT

+    

> concat. along variables
> Output at time t+ ∆ tOutput at time t+ 2∆ t

+        

> Swin Transformer Block (windows in parallel)
> Local input Local input
> local channels seq.
> GPU 1 GPU 2 Dist. Linear
> P2P comm.
> QKV
> Embed. dim / c seq.
> QKV
> softmax
> ×QKTV
> ×heads FlashAttention-2 / Transformer Engine
> softmax
> ×QKTV
> Dist. Linear
> P2P comm.
> Local output Local output
> local channels seq.

Fig. 2: BEAST combines a downsampling–upsampling backbone of Swin-Transformer blocks with convolutional patch embedding and recovery. Unlike typical AI models, it ingests two consecutive samples ( t and t − ∆t). The lower schematic illustrates the Swin blocks’ novel parallelization scheme using domain–tensor-parallelism. synchronized random seeds. Uncertainty parallelism allows us to evaluate more random weight samples by scaling to higher node counts, thereby improving the approximation of the current weight distribution and, ultimately, model quality. 

C. Data Parallelism 

Uncertainty parallelism can be combined orthogonally with data parallelism to accelerate and improve model training at the same time, adding an additional orthogonal scaling axis with d groups to our GPU grid. Training with d data parallel (DP) instances and u uncertainty parallel instances thus requires d × u DTP instances in total. However, given the size of the input data items and the model, a realistic setup can only run with one or two local data items, i.e., local batch size, or random weight samples per GPU. Hence, data parallel scaling out also adds more data items to the effective global batch size. In contrast to sampling parallelism, in which having larger sample numbers can lead to better predictive performance, scaling out data parallelism will lead to the occurrence of large batch effects [18]: AI models tend to converge to sharper local minima when the number of data items in a gradient update step becomes too large. For atmospheric models, this effect starts to arise at relatively small global batch sizes of around 16 to 32 [45]. The degree to which model training can be accelerated through plain data parallelism is thus limited. With the additional usage of uncertainty parallelism, we circumvent this limitation. 

D. Performance Optimization 

We further maximize per-GPU computational throughput with the following performance optimizations. Since each GPU in a DTP instance loads a shard of the input data sample, we pre-shard the dataset accordingly in the channel and spatial (longitude) domain, thereby facilitating file access for data staging. To further stabilize data I/O and alleviate the strain on the file system, we perform data access in waves of 128 ranks in each wave and de-synchronize file system access every 50 iterations. We fuse the MLPs of the NICE normalization and use grouped normalization to eliminate communication across the split channel domain. Our implementation of the domain– tensor-parallel layers requires us to overwrite the backward function of each layer type. This allows us to also combine gra-dient communication in the backward pass with respect to the input and weights. This step essentially halves communication in the backward pass, significantly improving performance. We handle communication for UP and DP groups via Py-Torch’s DistributedDataParallel wrapper [16]. We also apply post-grad accumulation hooks on the weight syn-chronization between spatial ranks to better overlap commu-nication with the backward pass. Additionally, we found that the computation of the ELBO loss takes significantly longer than the computation of aregular RMSE loss in a non-Bayesian neural network. To alleviate this bottleneck, we vectorize the computation in the prior matching term, which does not require communication, and overlap it with the computation for the data-fitting term, 6

TABLE I: Software stack on JUPITER and LUMI               

> Component JUPITER LUMI
> Container Runtime Apptainer SingularityCE Operating System RHE Linux 9.9 SUSE 15.6 Acc Library CUDA 13.2 ROCM 6.2.4 XCCL NCCL 2.29.7 RCCL 2.22.5 PyTorch 2.12.0 2.7.1 Python 3.12 3.12

which does require communication of the locally obtained ensemble members. IV. P ERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT 

We evaluate our 4D parallelization scheme, consisting of domain-, tensor-, uncertainty-, and data-parallelism, on the task of training BEAST with mean-field variational inference. 

A. Model Architecture 

The model architecture of BEAST, visualized in Figure 2, is based on a 2D Swin Transformer [34]: The input data is embedded via a 2D non-overlapping convolution with a spatial patch size of 2 × 2. Then, multi-headed self-attention is per-formed on non-overlapping windows in a Swin-Transformer-manner. In between each attention layer, the entire global domain is rolled by ( ⌊window size /2⌋) patches in both spa-tial dimensions. Periodic boundaries are used in the latitude dimension. The data is then downsampled by a 2D convolu-tion with a patch size of 2, which also doubles the hidden dimension. Another Swin Transformer block is applied before the data is upsampled back with a transposed convolution and an MLP to mix across the channels, before another Swin Transformer block is applied. Finally, the target, with the original spatial dimensions, is recovered with a transpose convolution. 

B. Training objective 

We train BEAST to perform 12- and 24-hourly forecasts based on two previous time steps, i.e., atmospheric variables at times t and t − 12 h are used as input to predict atmospheric variables at times (t + 12 h, t + 24 h). For training, we use the ERA5 dataset [46], obtained from WeatherBench2 [47] and stored in the zarr format. The data uses an equiangular grid at a global resolution of 0.25° ( ≈ 30 km). We consider 84 input variables in total—six surface variables: 10 m u-velocity, 10 m v-velocity, mean sea level pressure, 2 m temperature, sea surface temperature, total precipitation, and six pressure variables: geopotential, specific humidity, temperature, and the u, v, and w components of wind velocity. Pressure variables are considered at 13 pressure levels of 1000, 925, 850, 700, 600, 500, 400, 300, 250, 200, 150, 100, and 50 hPa. Constant inputs of soil type, topography, and land masks are also used. Variables from different time steps are concatenated along the channel dimension. Data is normalized with per-variable Z-score normalization. Hourly data from 1979–2019 is used for training, and data from 2020–2025 is used for evaluations. For minimizing the ELBO as loss function, we use an Adam optimizer with an initial learning rate of 10 −4, decaying to 

10 −5 with a cosine decay. Linear warm-up is used for the first 10 000 gradient steps. We train the model using mixed precision format: for Transformer Engine and FlashAttention in the Transformer layers, we leverage Bfloat16 precision. All other computations are performed in TensorFloat32 or Float32 precision, to reflect the sensitivity of the Bayesian optimization objective to numerical rounding errors. 

C. System specifications 

We perform training of BEAST on two systems: JUPITER and LUMI. JUPITER is a EuroHPC JU supercomputer hosted at Forschungszentrum J¨ ulich, Germany. It is the first exascale machine in Europe and ranks #5 in the TOP500 of June 2026, reaching 1 EFLOP/s in the HPL benchmark. JUPITER has been designed for energy-efficient, high-scaling numerical and AI applications [48], and is currently in the finalization of its build-up phase. The system utilizes 23 536 NVIDIA GH200 superchips, each combining a 72-core NVIDIA Grace CPU (120 GB LPDDR5 memory) with a Hopper GPU (96 GB HBM3 memory) through a unique high-bandwidth bus called NVLink-C2C (900 GB/s bandwidth). The full system features 5884 nodes, of which about 5200 were accessible to us. Within a node, the GPUs are all-to-all connected with pair-wise bandwidths of 300 GB/s. Similarly, all CPUs are all-to-all-connected with pair-wise bandwidths of 200 GB/s. Each node features four NVIDIA InfiniBand NDR200 network adapters with each 200 Gbit/s injection bandwidth, interconnected in a Dragonfly+ topology. Up to 240 nodes are combined in a Dragonfly group, internally connected over two levels of switches in a fat tree (local) topology. Twenty-five of these groups form the JUPITER network, with 30 direct links between each pair of groups; each inter-switch link provides 400 Gbit/s bandwidth. Adaptive routing is enabled to counteract congestion due to the tapering of the network outside of the groups. LUMI is a EuroHPC JU supercomputer hosted by the CSC – IT Center for Science in Finland. It is a pre-exascale Cray EX supercomputer supplied by Hewlett Packard Enterprise (HPE). As of June 2026, LUMI ranks #11 in the TOP500 list, reaching 386 PFLOP/s in the HPL benchmark. The majority of the system’s compute power is found in the LUMI-G hardware partition, which consists of 2978 nodes. Each node is equipped with four AMD MI250x GPUs and a single 64-core AMD EPYC Trento CPU. The MI250X GPU is a multi-chip module containing two GPU dies named Graphics Compute Die (GCD) by AMD. Each die includes 110 compute units and has access to a 64 GB slice of HBM2e memory, resulting in a total of 220 compute units and 128 GB of total memory per MI250x module. LUMI uses a Dragonfly network topology in which com-pute nodes are organized into groups interconnected via switches. The compute nodes are linked through the HPE Cray Slingshot-11 200 Gbit/s network interconnect (NIC). The HPE Cray Slingshot NIC features high-performance RDMA and hardware acceleration for MPI and SHMEM-based software. 7

TABLE II: BEAST configurations used in scaling experiments and model training.                                          

> Outer windows Inner windows
> Name Params (B) TFLOP Dim. Win. size Heads Layers Dim. Win. size Heads Layers JUPITER-2.4B-64K 2.36 3557.9 3072 [360, 180] 24 26144 [180, 30] 48 2LUMI-1.1B-64K 1.05 2238.2 2048 [360, 180] 16 24096 [180, 30] 32 2JUPITER-0.7B-1.8K 0.68 423.8 1024 [30, 60] 16 42048 [20, 30] 32 6

D. Software 

The software stack employed in this work is based on containerized environments, leveraging Apptainer / Singularity Community Edition [49] to ensure portability and repro-ducibility across high-performance computing (HPC) systems. Apptainer enables unprivileged container execution and is widely adopted in scientific and high-performance computing contexts. On JUPITER, the base container is the NVIDIA NGC PyTorch image (version 26.04-py3 [50]), available on the NVIDIA NGC registry. For LUMI, we rely on a provided custom ROCm+PyTorch container [51]. Domain and tensor parallelism of the PyTorch layers was done by using the library jigsaw [39], and the Bayesian model was obtained by converting the deterministic torch model with torch_blue [52]. Profiles and traces for opti-mization were recorded using the built-in torch profiler and NVIDIA Nsight Systems 2026.2.1. Power draw and memory utilization measurements for the hardware accelerators were sampled during training using perun [53] for both systems. 

E. Performance metrics 

The most relevant performance metrics when training neu-ral networks are predictive performance and overall training time. For a fixed-size dataset, training time is influenced by two factors: the time it takes to iterate through the entire dataset in batched forward-backward passes ( time-per-epoch )and the number of epochs, i.e., iterations over the entire dataset, necessary for model convergence ( convergence rate ). While the latter is generally addressed algorithmically, the former can be directly tied to the computational throughput of performing one batch iteration (forward–backward pass and weight update). To assess the computational throughput of the batch iterations in our scaling experiments, we measure the time for 1) a forward–backward-update step, and 2) one full epoch using Python’s high-resolution time 

module with time.perf_counter_ns() and the 

torch.cuda.streams.Event() to set markers to monitor accelerator computations. The former includes the overhead associated with model training: data I/O, checkpointing, and evaluation; whereas the latter captures exclusively the computation that is offloaded to hardware accelerators. We further estimate the number of floating-point operations (FLOP) of a forward–backward pass on a DTP instance, using PyTorch’s torch.utils.flop_counter 

tools. Based on this, we report the number of FLOP/s for 1) a forward–backward-update-step as peak performance and 2) for a full epoch as sustained performance by dividing the number of FLOP by the measured time. We also report accelerator metrics related to ideal use during the forward– backward-pass, including percentage of idle time, memory utilization, and average power draw. In addition to these computational throughput numbers, we also report the commonly used metric images/sec from computer vision. In atmospheric modeling, this corresponds to the forecast throughput or forecast/s, which is estimated based on the average batch processing time, and the total number of data items per batch (DP instances × local batch size). We also introduce the orthogonal metric of sample/s, determined via the product of forecast/s × UP instances × local sampling size, for ensemble generation throughput . This metric indicates throughput regarding the evaluation of random weight samples of the BNN and is especially relevant for domain scientists during inference over an evaluation dataset, indicating how long it takes to generate a meaningful ensemble. Next to compute performance, we evaluate the probabilistic predictive skill scores of a fully trained BEAST, where we report the commonly used root mean square error (RMSE) of the ensemble average prediction, probabilistic spread skill ratio (SSR), and continuous ranked probability score (CRPS) metrics for different atmospheric variables. These metrics cover three different aspects: The RMSE of the ensemble mean measures how well the average forecast matches the target. The SSR quantifies whether the model’s uncertainty is well-calibrated. The CRPS, which we calculate using the fair CRPS estimator [54], combines these two aspects to measure overall probabilistic prediction quality. We compare our predictive skill scores against the current-best probabilistic AI model, FGN [9] vs. ERA5, and the IFS ensemble forecast [55] vs. ERA5, both obtained from [47]. We further assess the skill of BEAST on predicting ex-treme events, by evaluating three exemplary use-cases, using the recently published ExtremeWeatherBench (EWB) Python package [56]: a) a heat wave, b) a freeze, and c) a tropical cyclone (TC). The heat wave occurred from August 8, 2022, until August 16, 2022, and affected southern UK, France, and Spain. The freeze affected Western and Central Europe from December 10, 2022, until December 20, 2022. For the TC, we used Damien, a category 3 cyclone, which occurred between February 3, 2020, and February 9, 2020, over Western Aus-tralia. These cases probe both prolonged large-scale tempera-ture anomalies and the emergence and subsequent trajectory of a compact, rapidly evolving severe-weather system. V. P ERFORMANCE RESULTS 

Table II describes the three model configurations used in our experiments. The JUPITER-2.4B-64K and LUMI-1.1B-64K model architectures are optimized to leverage the avail-able hardware and train the maximal model size as efficiently 8

as possible. Due to the size of these model configurations, the local batch size and number of local samples are restricted to 1. However, the long sequence length considered in the attention windows (64 000) causes the training time per sam-ple to become prohibitively long for training a model until convergence. Therefore, we define JUPITER-0.7B-1.8K, asmaller but deeper model configuration designed to maximize predictive skill. For all three configurations, we distribute one DTP instance on a GPU mesh of [s, c] = [4, 2] , i.e., 8 GPUs (2 nodes) on JUPITER and 8 GCDs (1 node) on LUMI, when per-forming training steps (forward–backward-update passes). At inference, where the memory footprint is much smaller due to the absence of gradients and optimizer states, we distribute one DTP instance on a GPU mesh of [s, c] = [2, 2] , i.e., 4 GPUs. 

A. Baseline performance 

We define baseline performance on the LUMI-1.1B-64K and JUPITER-2.4B-64K model configurations. The base-line configurations require 16 GPUs on both systems: adomain–tensor group of [4, 2] × 2 UP groups, and a single data parallel group. This translates to 4 compute nodes on JUPITER, and 2 nodes on LUMI. Based on an average batch time (forward–backward-update) of 1.68 s on the JUPITER system, and an es-timated 3.56 PFLOP operations given the model config-uration, JUPITER-2.4B-64K reaches a peak performance of 1.06 PFLOP/(s Node), and a sustained performance of 0.92 PFLOP/(s Node). This translates to 0.59 forecast/s. We measured the amount of idle time and time spent waiting for communication by profiling the system on 20 gradient updates, showing ∼25 % of the time is spent waiting on communication, ∼1 % device idle time, and ∼72 % of the time is being used for computation. Within an epoch, mem-ory measurements for the individual GPUs report 71.45 GB consistently, utilizing 74.43 % of the total accelerator mem-ory. With the LUMI-1.1B-64K configuration, the average forward–backward-pass runs for 4.47 s. Based on an esti-mated 2.24 PFLOP, we reach single node peak performance of 0.5 PFLOP/(s Node), or 0.22 forecast/s. Memory measure-ments show each GCD reporting an average of 48.87 GB, or 76 % GPU memory utilization. Additionally, we measured the power draw of the hardware accelerators during training to provide a realistic estimate of the energy cost of training and running our Bayesian model [57]. We observe an average power draw of 455.6 W on each MI250X card, and 3.64 kW for training LUMI-1.1B-64K in the baseline configuration. By comparison, we measured a consistent power draw of 514.36 W per GPU on the JUPITER system, resulting in a total GPU power draw of 8.22 kW for training JUPITER-2.4B-64K over the four nodes in the baseline configuration. 

B. Scaling experiments 

To evaluate the efficiency of uncertainty parallelism, we scale out the number u of UP groups in a weak scaling manner, i.e., we increase the number of global weight samples evaluated per data batch by increasing the number of UP instances. For JUPITER-2.4B-64K and LUMI-1.1B-64K we conduct this experiment in two regimes: for one, we scale 

u from 2 to 16, with a single DP instance, i.e., using 16 through 128 GPUs, or GCDs in LUMI. Such a configuration is not very realistic for production training runs, where multi-ple DP instances would be used to iterate over the dataset faster. Hence, we conduct a second round of this scaling experiment, where we keep the number of DP instances, i.e., the global batch size, fixed at 16 and increase the number of UP instances from 2 to 64, i.e., using 256 to 16 384 GPUs. For JUPITER-0.7B-1.8K we evaluate UP scaling in both training and inference mode, with a fixed global batch size of 4, increasing the number of UP instances from 8 to a total of 2048 nodes on JUPITER. The scaling experiments shed light on two interesting aspects of our multidimensional parallelization scheme. For one, DP requires different data to be read from storage by each rank, while for UP, each rank reads the same data. Having both UP and DP instances participate in the training illustrates how our parallelization scheme handles these different I/O streams. Second, both UP and DP utilize PyTorch’s DistributedDataParallel 

wrapper [16] to handle communication. Thus, the experiment allows us to investigate if these two communication axes potentially compete against one another, thereby hindering performance. The results for JUPITER-2.4B-64K and LUMI-1.1B-64K are shown in Figure 3 (a). The values in the gray section indicate the scaling experiments where the DP size is 1, and the values after the gray section showcase the results of the configuration with the increased DP size of 16. On LUMI, we observe almost constant throughput for lower node counts up to 3072 GPUs, whereas on JUPITER, we observe a small degradation of per-GPU performance. On both systems, performance starts to deteriorate notably at larger node counts. This scalability limit of UP can be attributed to the increased stress on the file system and higher commu-nication cost during the loss calculation. Ensemble throughput scaling of JUPITER-0.7B-1.8K is presented in Figure 3 (c). On 2048 nodes, the training configuration reaches a total of 1293.31 sample/s, with a scaling efficiency of 52.35 %, similar to the results shown in Figure 3 (a). Again, we observe a degradation in performance, which can be attributed to the additional communication required to calculate the loss for a larger number of samples generated per forward pass. This effect disappears in inference mode, where the loss is not calculated, and the uncertainty parallel groups become independent of each other. On 2048, the predictive model reaches 5716.61 sample/s, with an ensemble scaling efficiency of 82.01 %. Next, we evaluate scaling out data parallelism in a strong scaling manner: We increase the global batch size by increas-ing the number of DP instances from 1 to 16 at a fixed local batch size of 1, thereby reducing the overall number of iterations in an epoch. Similarly to UP weak scaling, we conduct this strong scaling experiment for JUPITER-2.4B-64K and LUMI-1.1B-64K in two setups: one with just 2 UP 9    

> Ideal scaling JUPITER-2.4B-64K LUMI-1.1B-64K JUPITER-0.7B-1.8K Training JUPITER-0.7B-1.8K Inference

(a) Weak scaling computational throughput       

> DP=1
> ←
> DP=16
> →↑higher is better 16 64 256 1024 4096 16 384 50 100 150 200 250 300 350
> GPUs Throughput (TFLOPS/s/GPU)

(b) Strong scaling performance        

> UP=2
> ←
> UP=16
> →
> 5120 Nodes →↑higher is better 416 64 256 1024 4096 1310 30 100 300 1,000 3,000 10,000
> Nodes Peak performance (PFLOPS/s)

(c) Weak scaling ensemble throughput     

> 32 128 512 2 048 8 192 16 64 256 1024 4096
> GPUs Samples (/s)

(d) Strong scaling data throughput         

> ↑hi 124816 32 64 128 0.25 0.5 124816 32 64
> DP Group Size Forecasts (/s)

Fig. 3: Scaling results of BEAST on JUPITER and LUMI for various data- and uncertainty-parallel setups, expressed in computational, data, and ensemble throughput as well as peak performance under strong scaling, i.e., increasing DP with increasing node counts, and weak scaling with fixed per-node workload, i.e., increasing UP with increasing full GPU counts. instances, thus scaling from 2 to 32 nodes, and one with 16 UP instances, thus scaling from 64 to 5120 nodes. For JUPITER-0.7B-1.8K we keep the number of random weight samples (ensemble members) in the training configuration at 96, using 48 UP instances, and scale out DP from 1 to 16, i.e. 96 to 1536 nodes. Results are presented in Figure 3 (b) and (d). Again, the values in the gray sections indicate the scaling experiments where the UP size is 2, i.e., training with a 2 UP instance, and the values after the gray section showcase the results of the configuration with the increased UP size of 16. We observe near-perfect DP-strong scaling for all three model configurations on both JUPITER and LUMI. On 5120 nodes on JUPITER, i.e., 20 480 GH200 GPUs, JUPITER-2.4B-64K runs at a total peak performance of 3.96 EFLOP/s during forward–backward-update step, and a scaling efficiency of 73.99 %. LUMI-1.1B-64K reaches 463.23 PFLOP/s at 1024 nodes, corresponding to 92.09 % scaling efficiency. These results indicate that the parallelism strategy and model config-uration space allow for good system portability. The seamless transition between the different UP and DP instance sizes highlights the efficiency of both parallelism axes. JUPITER-0.7B-1.8K yields a higher forecast throughput per data parallel group than the large configurations. At a single DP instance, the predictive configuration achieves a 1.13 forecast/s, almost double the throughput of JUPITER-2.4B-64K. With 16 DP instances, or 1536 nodes, it reaches 14.08 forecast/s, each with 96 ensemble members, at a sus-tained performance of 239.88 TFLOP. 

C. Full model training and predictive skill 

We train BEAST in the JUPITER-0.7B-1.8K configuration on 384 nodes on JUPITER, using 4 DP and 48 UP instances, for 983 350 optimizer update steps. We use 2 samples per UP instance and keep the local batch size to 1, thus using a global batch size of 4 and drawing 96 random weight samples per optimizer update step. One epoch on 40 years of data (1979–2020) requires 89 835 gradient update steps and takes 25.45 h. The sustained training performance is 70.46 PFLOP/s. Predictive metrics of the trained model for four different variables (U10, T2M, U850, T850) for the two forecast time steps 12 h and 24 h are shown in Figure 4, in comparison to the state-of-the-art probabilistic model FGN and the IFS ensemble forecast. We observe competitive to superior predictive scores with much better calibrated uncertainty estimates, and stable roll-out for up to ten days. Furthermore, BEAST can predict extreme events with ex-ceptional skill. For one, it excels at the task of TC track predic-tion, as shown in Figure 5 for TC Damien. The mean ensemble prediction of BEAST follows the observed track, including the transition from land to ocean and the subsequent landfall. The 10                  

> BEAST-12H IFS ENS-12H FGN-12H BEAST-24H IFS ENS-24H FGN-24H
> ↓lower is better
> U10 T2M U850 T850 00.5 11.5
> Variable RMSE
> ↓lower is better
> U10 T2M U850 T850 00.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
> Variable CRPS
> ↑↓ over-/under-dispersive
> U10 T2M U850 T850 00.5 11.5
> Variable Spread/skill ratio

Fig. 4: Forecasting skill of BEAST across the four key variables, u component of wind velocity at 10m (U10), 2 meter temperature (T2M), u component of wind velocity at 850 hPa (U850), and temperature at 850 hPa (T850), compared to IFS-ENS and FGN. All three models were evaluated against ERA5, on one year of data (2022). ensemble members form a spread that encloses the observed track, with uncertainty increasing with forecast lead time as expected. Second, it can forecast both the heat wave and the freeze several days in advance, with skill scores competitive to or even superior to the IFS, as shown in Figure 6. These results show that BEAST’s probabilistic forecasts remain informative not only in aggregate verification, but also for rare events where accurately representing both the expected evolution and its uncertainty is particularly consequential. Increasing the number of random weight samples not only impacts computational performance but also predictive skill. Table III illustrates how larger ensemble sizes lead to better predictive skill in terms of lower RMSE. This result highlights the benefit of our uncertainty parallelism approach, which allows us to efficiently generate large ensembles by scaling out uncertainty parallelism. Generating a 15-day forecast tra-jectory with BEAST takes about 16 s to 17 s on 4 GH200 GPUs, independent of the ensemble size. For comparison, FGN reports inference times of just under 1 minute on a single TPU v5p [9]. In summary, our results demonstrate the strengths of our innovations: They enable us to efficiently utilize the available resources (up to 20 480 GH200 GPUs) to generate large, accurate ensembles , while allowing for high flexibility re-garding the modeling objectives. The combination of domain-, tensor-, uncertainty, and data-parallelism in an orthogonal 4D parallelization scheme can be leveraged to:  

> •

prioritize model size beyond the 1B parameter mark towards building bigger models, e.g., foundation models  

> •

prioritize weight sample number towards maximizing ensemble generation throughput for better uncertainty quantification  

> •

prioritize batch size towards maximizing forecast throughput for faster training and inference Together, these aspects allow us to leverage the full potential of the Bayesian paradigm for smarter AI models in atmospheric forecasting. VI. I MPLICATIONS 

Until now, training AI models for global atmospheric fore-casting in a fully Bayesian framework has not been possi-ble. While implementing the complex mathematical concepts TABLE III: Inference time for a 15-day forecast, and RMSE values of 2-meter temperature (T2m) for 12 h and 24 h predic-tions generated with BEAST-JUPITER-0.7B-1.8K, evaluated on one year of validation data (2022) with increasingly larger ensembles. Evaluation was conducted by distributing one DTP instance on 4 GH200 GPUs, and a global batch size of 16. 

# GPUs Ensemble member Inference time [s] T2m RMSE 12h 24h 128 8 15.58 0.7507 0.8661 512 32 16.85 0.7289 0.8390 1536 96 16.98 0.7237 0.8328 3072 768 15.74 0.7226 0.8316 

behind BNNs is already a challenge in itself, the associated computational training cost has ultimately been the prohibitive factor. We present BEAST, the first large-scale Bayesian Swin Transformer for atmospheric forecasting, able to quantify both, epistemic (model) and aleatoric (data) uncertainty. This breakthrough is enabled by our innovative 4D parallelization scheme, consisting of domain-, tensor-, uncertainty-, and data-parallelism. We achieve state-of-the-art performance in both training speed and efficiency, peaking at 3.96 EFLOP/s on 20 480 NVIDIA GH200 GPUs on the JUPITER supercomputer. After training for nearly one million gradient updates, a 700-million-parameter model achieves predictive skill scores competitive with the state-of-the-art probabilistic AI model FGN and the IFS ensemble forecast. Yet, through our highly efficient domain-tensor-parallelism approach, BEAST is able to gen-erate large ensembles significantly faster: a single 15-day forecast can be generated on 4 GH200 GPUs in less than 20 s. On 1536 nodes, we achieve a forecast generation throughput of 14.08 forecast/s with 96 ensemble members. This innovation opens a new era for AI-based atmospheric sciences. Under a changing climate, fast and accurate un-certainty quantification in weather forecasting is becoming increasingly important. Existing approaches to uncertainty quantification in AI models follow methods from generative AI, using input randomness to produce ensemble forecasts; however, they neglect the uncertainty of the model itself, making the predictions overconfident [58]. In contrast, our Bayesian model formulation allows for a more principled esti-11 

Fig. 5: Probability for cyclone passing within 150 km for TC Damien, predicted by BEAST (initialized with ERA5 data from 02-01-2020, 96 ensemble members). The reference track is obtained from the International Best Track Archive for Climate Stewardship (IBTrACS).                                         

> European Heat Wave (August 2022)
> 3.826 3.872 3.977 4.239 4.572 3.620 3.674 3.821 3.886 3.969 3.614 3.659 3.810 3.866 3.956 3.615 3.661 3.802 3.857 3.959 IFS HRES
> BEAST  n=32 n=96 n=256 135710 Lead Time [days] -15 015 % Diff vs IFS HRES
> European Freeze (December 2022)
> 5.730 5.855 6.037 6.196 6.921 5.875 6.070 6.045 5.969 5.955 5.865 6.045 6.003 5.987 5.894 5.868 6.021 5.989 5.998 5.874 IFS HRES
> BEAST  n=32 n=96 n=256 135710 Lead Time [days] -20 020 % Diff vs IFS HRES

Fig. 6: RMSE values of BEAST predictions for a heat wave and a freeze, both occurring over Europe in 2022, compared to the IFS HRES. Predictions were generated with 32,96 and 256 ensemble members, rolled out for up to 10-days, with 6 h- initialization times. Lower values indicate better predictive skill. mation of the prediction certainty, leading to better calibrated uncertainty estimates. This calibration is crucial, especially for predicting extreme weather events such as heatwaves, floods, and severe storms. Decision makers depend on accurate estimates of the likelihood and severity of extreme events to prepare for possible outcomes and take preventative measures to reduce potential damages to people, infrastructures, and the economy. As demonstrated by our results, BEAST can deliver upon this promise by predicting extreme events, such as heat waves or tropical cyclones, with high accuracy. Our contribution thus directly addresses the challenges we are facing under a changing climate. Next to these direct implications, our approach to enable fast and efficient training of large-scale BNNs also holds the potential to revolutionize Earth system sciences beyond atmospheric forecasting. While the lack of sufficiently large, well-curated datasets has thus far hindered true breakthroughs in AI-based models of Earth system components other than the atmosphere—such as the ocean—our Bayesian approach can overcome this barrier. With its capabilities to learn the underly-ing data distribution and to capture the associated uncertainty in its distributional model weights, a BNN is particularly well-suited to leverage small, high-quality datasets, e.g., from km-scale climate simulations [59] to build the next generation of climate emulators. Our approach to flexibly allocate GPU memory through highly efficient domain–tensor-parallelism puts us in a prime position to increase the size of input data items beyond the current resolutions towards multi-timestep forecasting and km-scale modeling. Our breakthroughs were enabled by leveraging top-tier supercomputers with thousands of GPUs. Going forward, the results presented in this work mark only the beginning of exploring high-performance computing for BNNs. By intro-ducing uncertainty parallelism as an orthogonal scaling axis, we have successfully overcome the current barriers in scaling out neural network training through plain data-parallelism, which is inevitably limited due to large-batch effects. Scaling out uncertainty parallelism goes beyond merely accelerating neural network training—it creates scientific value. For future work, we aim to leverage the power of current and future exascale systems by improving stability for lower precision computations and seeking out additional parallelization axes for scaling. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This project received access to the JUPITER supercomputer through the JUPITER Research and Early Access Program (JUREAP). JUPITER is funded by the EuroHPC Joint Under-taking, the German Federal Ministry of Research, Technology and Space, and the Ministry of Culture and Science of the German state of North Rhine-Westphalia. Computations on the LUMI supercomputer were enabled by resources provided by CSC - IT Center for Science, Finland. LUMI is co-funded by the EuroHPC Joint Undertaking and the LUMI Consortium. We would like to express our gratitude to Christelle Piechurski from NVIDIA for the continuous support and encouragement to pursue this project from the beginning. We would like to thank Benedikt von St. Vieth and Damian Al-varez from JSC for their assistance and support, and Christian Schiffer for the exchanges on extreme-scale AI. We are also thankful to Jesse Harrison and Jarmo M¨ akel¨ a from CSC for supporting this submission, and to Gaurav Naithani and Billy Braithwaite from CSC for their continuous input and insightful discussions on the topics of Bayesian neural networks and FlashAttention. This research is supported by the German Federal Ministry of Research, Technology and Space (BMFTR) under the 12 

01LK2313A SMARTWEATHER21-SCC-2 grant, by the Carl Zeiss Foundation under the Breakthroughs 2025 “WOW – a World model of Our World” project, by the European High Performance Computing Joint Undertaking (JU) and the the German Federal Ministry of Research, Technology and Space (BMFTR), the Ministry of Culture and Science of North Rhine-Westphalia (MKW NRW) and the Hessian Ministry of Science and Research, Arts and Culture (HMWK) under grant agreement No 101250682 (JUPITER AI Factory, JAIF). REFERENCES 

[1] Y. Yu, L. Huang, A. Calotoiu, and T. Hoefler, “Scaling laws of global weather models,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.22962 [2] R. Lam, A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, M. Willson, P. Wirnsberger, M. Fortunato, F. Alet, S. Ravuri, T. Ewalds, Z. Eaton-Rosen, W. Hu, A. Merose, S. Hoyer, G. Holland, O. Vinyals, J. Stott, A. Pritzel, S. Mohamed, and P. Battaglia, “Learning skillful medium-range global weather forecasting,” Science , vol. 382, no. 6677, pp. 1416–1421, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.adi2336 [3] K. Bi, L. Xie, H. Zhang, X. Chen, X. Gu, and Q. Tian, “Accurate medium-range global weather forecasting with 3d neural networks,” Nature , vol. 619, no. 7970, pp. 533– 538, 2023. [4] T. Kurth, S. Subramanian, P. Harrington, J. Pathak, M. Mardani, D. Hall, A. Miele, K. Kashinath, and A. Anandkumar, “Fourcastnet: Accelerating global high-resolution weather forecasting using adaptive fourier neural operators,” in Proceedings of the platform for advanced scientific computing conference , 2023, pp. 1– 11. [5] B. Bonev, T. Kurth, C. Hundt, J. Pathak, M. Baust, K. Kashinath, and A. Anandkumar, “Spherical fourier neural operators: learning stable dynamics on the sphere,” in Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. ICML’23. JMLR.org, 2023. [6] A. Mahesh, W. D. Collins, B. Bonev, N. Brenowitz, Y. Cohen, J. Elms, P. Harrington, K. Kashinath, T. Kurth, J. North, T. O’Brien, M. Pritchard, D. Pruitt, M. Risser, S. Subramanian, and J. Willard, “Huge ensembles – part 1: Design of ensemble weather forecasts using spherical fourier neural operators,” Geoscientific Model Development , vol. 18, no. 17, pp. 5575–5603, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://gmd.copernicus.org/articles/ 18/5575/2025/ [7] A. Mahesh, W. D. Collins, B. Bonev, N. Brenowitz, Y. Cohen, P. Harrington, K. Kashinath, T. Kurth, J. North, T. A. O’Brien, M. Pritchard, D. Pruitt, M. Risser, S. Subramanian, and J. Willard, “Huge ensembles – part 2: Properties of a huge ensemble of hindcasts generated with spherical fourier neural operators,” Geoscientific Model Development , vol. 18, no. 17, pp. 5605–5633, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://gmd.copernicus.org/articles/18/5605/2025/ [8] I. Price, A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, F. Alet, T. R. Andersson, A. El-Kadi, D. Masters, T. Ewalds, J. Stott, S. Mohamed, P. Battaglia, R. Lam, and M. Willson, “Probabilistic weather forecasting with machine learning,” Nature , vol. 637, no. 8044, pp. 84—-90, 2024. [9] F. Alet, I. Price, A. El-Kadi, D. Masters, S. Markou, T. R. Andersson, J. Stott, R. Lam, M. Willson, A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, and P. Battaglia, “Skillful joint probabilistic weather forecasting from marginals,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.10772 [10] B. Bonev, T. Kurth, A. Mahesh, M. Bisson, J. Kossaifi, K. Kashinath, A. Anandkumar, W. D. Collins, M. S. Pritchard, and A. Keller, “Fourcastnet 3: A geometric approach to probabilistic machine-learning weather forecasting at scale,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2507.12144 [11] S. Lang, M. Alexe, M. C. Clare, C. Roberts, R. Ade-woyin, Z. Ben Bouall` egue, M. Chantry, J. Dramsch, P. D. Dueben, S. Hahner, P. Maciel, A. Prieto-Nemesio, C. O’Brien, F. Pinault, J. Polster, B. Raoult, S. Tietsche, and M. Leutbecher, “Aifs-crps: ensemble forecasting using a model trained with a loss function based on the continuous ranked probability score,” npj Artificial Intelligence , vol. 2, no. 1, p. 18, 2026. [12] S. Lee, S. Purushwalkam, M. Cogswell, D. Crandall, and D. Batra, “Why m heads are better than one: Training a diverse ensemble of deep networks,” 2015. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06314 [13] B. Lakshminarayanan, A. Pritzel, and C. Blundell, “Simple and scalable predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles,” in Proceedings of the 31st Inter-national Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 30, 2017, pp. 6405–6416. [Online]. Avail-able: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/ 2017/file/9ef2ed4b7fd2c810847ffa5fa85bce38-Paper.pdf [14] J. Gawlikowski, C. R. N. Tassi, M. Ali, J. Lee, M. Humt, J. Feng, A. Kruspe, R. Triebel, P. Jung, R. Roscher, M. Shahzad, W. Yang, R. Bamler, and X. X. Zhu, “A survey of uncertainty in deep neural networks,” Artificial intelligence review , vol. 56, no. Suppl 1, pp. 1513–1589, 2023. [15] L. V. Jospin, H. Laga, F. Boussaid, W. Buntine, and M. Bennamoun, “Hands-on bayesian neural networks—a tutorial for deep learning users,” IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine , vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 29–48, 2022. [16] S. Li, Y. Zhao, R. Varma, O. Salpekar, P. Noordhuis, T. Li, A. Paszke, J. Smith, B. Vaughan, P. Damania, and S. Chintala, “Pytorch distributed: experiences on accelerating data parallel training,” Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 3005—-3018, Aug. 2020. [Online]. Available: https: //doi.org/10.14778/3415478.3415530 [17] T. Ben-Nun and T. Hoefler, “Demystifying parallel and distributed deep learning: An in-depth concurrency anal-ysis,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) , vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1–43, 2019. [18] N. S. Keskar, D. Mudigere, J. Nocedal, M. Smelyanskiy, and P. T. P. Tang, “On large-batch training for deep learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima,” in 

International Conference on Learning Representations ,13 

2017, pp. 1–16. [Online]. Available: https://openreview. net/pdf?id=H1oyRlYgg [19] T. Nguyen, J. Brandstetter, A. Kapoor, J. K. Gupta, and A. Grover, “Climax: A foundation model for weather and climate,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2301.10343 [20] C. Lessig, I. Luise, B. Gong, M. Langguth, S. Stadtler, and M. Schultz, “Atmorep: A stochastic model of atmosphere dynamics using large scale representation learning,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/ abs/2308.13280 [21] C. Bodnar, W. P. Bruinsma, A. Lucic, M. Stanley, A. Allen, J. Brandstetter, P. Garvan, M. Riechert, J. A. Weyn, H. Dong, J. K. Gupta, K. Thambiratnam, A. T. Archibald, C.-C. Wu, E. Heider, M. Welling, R. E. Turner, and P. Perdikaris, “A foundation model for the earth system,” Nature , vol. 641, no. 8065, pp. 1180–1187, 2025. [22] Y. Huang, Y. Cheng, A. Bapna, O. Firat, M. X. Chen, D. Chen, H. Lee, J. Ngiam, Q. V. Le, Y. Wu, and Z. Chen, “Gpipe: efficient training of giant neural networks using pipeline parallelism,” in Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems . Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc., 2019, pp. 103–112. [Online]. Available: https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.5555/3454287.3454297 [23] A. Harlap, D. Narayanan, A. Phanishayee, V. Seshadri, N. R. Devanur, G. R. Ganger, and P. B. Gibbons, “Pipedream: Fast and efficient pipeline parallel DNN training,” CoRR , vol. abs/1806.03377, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.03377 [24] M. Shoeybi, M. Patwary, R. Puri, P. LeGresley, J. Casper, and B. Catanzaro, “Megatron-lm: Training multi-billion parameter language models using model parallelism,” 2020. [25] S. A. Jacobs, M. Tanaka, C. Zhang, M. Zhang, R. Y. Aminadabi, S. L. Song, S. Rajbhandari, and Y. He, “System optimizations for enabling training of extreme long sequence transformer models,” in Proceedings of the 43rd ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing , 2024, pp. 121–130. [26] S. Rajbhandari, J. Rasley, O. Ruwase, and Y. He, “Zero: Memory optimizations toward training trillion parameter models,” in SC20: international conference for high per-formance computing, networking, storage and analysis .IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–16. [27] Y. Zhao, A. Gu, R. Varma, L. Luo, C.-C. Huang, M. Xu, L. Wright, H. Shojanazeri, M. Ott, S. Shleifer, A. Desmaison, C. Balioglu, P. Damania, B. Nguyen, G. Chauhan, Y. Hao, A. Mathews, and S. Li, “Pytorch fsdp: Experiences on scaling fully sharded data parallel,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2304.11277 [28] J. Ren, S. Rajbhandari, R. Y. Aminabadi, O. Ruwase, S. Yang, M. Zhang, D. Li, and Y. He, “{Zero-offload }: Democratizing {billion-scale } model training,” in 2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 21) . USENIX Association, 2024, pp. 551–564. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/ atc21/presentation/ren-jie [29] T. Chen, B. Xu, C. Zhang, and C. Guestrin, “Training deep nets with sublinear memory cost,” 2016. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1604.06174 [30] X. Wang, S. Liu, A. Tsaris, J.-Y. Choi, A. Aji, M. Fan, W. Zhang, J. Yin, M. Ashfaq, D. Lu, and P. Balaprakash, “Orbit: Oak ridge base foundation model for earth system predictability,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.14712 [31] A. Dosovitskiy, L. Beyer, A. Kolesnikov, D. Weis-senborn, X. Zhai, T. Unterthiner, M. Dehghani, M. Minderer, G. Heigold, S. Gelly, J. Uszkoreit, and N. Houlsby, “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11929 [32] X. Wang, J.-Y. Choi, T. Kurihaya, I. Lyngaas, H.-J. Yoon, X. Xiao, D. Pugmire, M. Fan, N. M. Nafi, A. Tsaris, A. M. Aji, M. Hossain, M. Wahib, D. Wang, P. Thornton, P. Balaprakash, M. Ashfaq, and D. Lu, “Orbit-2: Scaling exascale vision foundation models for weather and climate downscaling,” in 

Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis . New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2025, pp. 86—-98. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3712285.3771989 [33] V. Hatanp¨ a¨ a, E. Ku, J. Stock, M. Emani, S. Foreman, C. Jung, S. Madireddy, T. Nguyen, V. Sastry, R. A. O. Sinurat, S. Wheeler, H. Zheng, T. Arcomano, V. Vishwanath, and R. Kotamarthi, “Aeris: Argonne earth systems model for reliable and skillful predictions,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.13523 [34] Z. Liu, Y. Lin, Y. Cao, H. Hu, Y. Wei, Z. Zhang, S. Lin, and B. Guo, “Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2021, pp. 10 012–10 022. [Online]. Available: https: //openaccess.thecvf.com/content/ICCV2021/papers/Liu Swin Transformer Hierarchical Vision Transformer Using Shifted Windows ICCV 2021 paper.pdf [35] A. Graves, “Practical variational inference for neural networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , J. Shawe-Taylor, R. Zemel, P. Bartlett, F. Pereira, and K. Weinberger, Eds., vol. 24. Curran Associates, Inc., 2011, pp. 1–9. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/2011/ file/7eb3c8be3d411e8ebfab08eba5f49632-Paper.pdf [36] M. D. Hoffman, D. M. Blei, C. Wang, and J. Paisley, “Stochastic variational inference,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1303—-1347, May 2013. [Online]. Available: https://jmlr.org/papers/ volume14/hoffman13a/hoffman13a.pdf [37] S. Kullback and R. A. Leibler, “On information and sufficiency,” The Annals of Mathematical Statistics ,vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 79–86, 1951. [Online]. Available: 14 

http://www.jstor.org/stable/2236703 [38] F. Wenzel, K. Roth, B. Veeling, J. Swiatkowski, L. Tran, S. Mandt, J. Snoek, T. Salimans, R. Jenatton, and S. Nowozin, “How good is the bayes posterior in deep neural networks really?” in Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning .PMLR, 2020, pp. 10 248–10 259. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/wenzel20a.html [39] D. Kieckhefen, M. G¨ otz, L. H. Heyen, A. Streit, and C. Debus, “Combining domain and tensor parallelism to train multi-billion-parameter ai weather models,” in 

Platform for Advanced Scientific Computing Conference ,2026, pp. 1–13. [40] T. Dao, “Flashattention-2: Faster attention with better parallelism and work partitioning,” in The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2024, pp. 1–10. [Online]. Available: https://openreview. net/forum?id=mZn2Xyh9Ec [41] NVIDIA, “Transformer engine,” 2026, version 1.11.0+e7a7f6da, accessed 2026-08-12. [Online]. Avail-able: https://github.com/NVIDIA/TransformerEngine [42] A. K. ¨Ozdemir, L. H. Heyen, A. Weyrauch, A. Streit, M. G¨ otz, and C. Debus, “Sampling parallelism for fast and efficient bayesian learning,” in Platform for Ad-vanced Scientific Computing Conference , 2026, pp. 1–13. [43] F. Brakel, U. Odyurt, and A.-L. Varbanescu, “Model parallelism on distributed infrastructure: A literature review from theory to llm case-studies,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.03699 [44] M. Chen, X. Tan, B. Li, Y. Liu, T. Qin, S. Zhao, and T.-Y. Liu, “Adaspeech: Adaptive text to speech for custom voice,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2103.00993 [45] P. Huber, D. Li, J. P. G. H. Muriedas, D. Kieckhefen, M. G¨ otz, A. Streit, and C. Debus, “Energy consumption in parallel neural network training,” in Proceedings of the 2026 SIAM Conference on Parallel Processing for Scientific Computing (PP) . Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2026, pp. 46–59. [Online]. Available: https: //epubs.siam.org/doi/abs/10.1137/1.9781611979022.4 [46] H. Hersbach, B. Bell, P. Berrisford, S. Hirahara, A. Hor´ anyi, J. Mu˜ noz-Sabater, J. Nicolas, C. Peubey, R. Radu, D. Schepers et al. , “The era5 global reanalysis,” 

Quarterly journal of the royal meteorological society ,vol. 146, no. 730, pp. 1999–2049, 2020. [47] S. Rasp, S. Hoyer, A. Merose, I. Langmore, P. Battaglia, T. Russell, A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, V. Yang, R. Carver, S. Agrawal, M. Chantry, Z. Ben Bouallegue, P. Dueben, C. Bromberg, J. Sisk, L. Barrington, A. Bell, and F. Sha, “Weatherbench 2: A benchmark for the next generation of data-driven global weather models,” Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems , vol. 16, no. 6, p. e2023MS004019, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley. com/doi/abs/10.1029/2023MS004019 [48] A. Herten, S. Achilles, D. Alvarez, J. Badwaik, E. Behle, M. Bode, T. Breuer, D. Caviedes-Voulli` eme, M. Cherti, A. Dabah, S. E. Sayed, W. Frings, A. Gonzalez-Nicolas, E. B. Gregory, K. H. Mood, T. Hater, J. Jitsev, C. M. John, J. H. Meinke, C. I. Meyer, P. Mezentsev, J.-O. Mirus, S. Nassyr, C. Penke, M. R¨ ommer, U. Sinha, B. v. S. Vieth, O. Stein, E. Suarez, D. Willsch, and I. Zhukov, “Application-driven exascale: The jupiter benchmark suite,” in SC24: International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis , 2024, pp. 1–45. [49] G. M. Kurtzer, V. Sochat, and M. W. Bauer, “Singularity: Scientific containers for mobility of compute,” PLOS ONE , vol. 12, no. 5, p. e0177459, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10. 1371/journal.pone.0177459 [50] NVIDIA, “NVIDIA NGC PyTorch,” 2026. [On-line]. Available: https://catalog.ngc.nvidia.com/orgs/ nvidia/containers/pytorch/layers?version=25.06-py3 [51] sfantao, “LUMI-containers/RecipesDocker/pytorch/build-rocm-6.2.4-python-3.12-pytorch-v2.7.1.docker at main · sfantao/LUMI-containers,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/sfantao/LUMI-containers/blob/main/ RecipesDocker/pytorch/build-rocm-6.2.4-python-3. 12-pytorch-v2.7.1.docker [52] A. Weyrauch, L. H. Heyen, J. P. G. H. Muriedas, P.-H. Hsia, A. K. ¨Ozdemir, A. Streit, M. G¨ otz, and C. Debus, “torch blue: A flexible python package for bayesian neural networks in PyTorch,” Journal of Open Source Software , vol. 11, no. 117, p. 9415, 2026. [Online]. Available: https://joss.theoj.org/papers/ 10.21105/joss.09415 [53] J. P. Guti´ errez Hermosillo Muriedas, K. Fl¨ ugel, C. De-bus, H. Obermaier, A. Streit, and M. G¨ otz, “perun: Benchmarking energy consumption of high-performance computing applications,” in European Conference on Parallel Processing . Springer, 2023, pp. 17–31. [54] M. Zamo and P. Naveau, “Estimation of the continuous ranked probability score with limited information and ap-plications to ensemble weather forecasts,” Mathematical Geosciences , vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 209–234, 2018. [55] European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), “Ifs documentation cy49r1-part v: Ensemble prediction system,” European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), Tech. Rep., 2024. [56] A. McGovern, T. Mandelbaum, D. Rothenberg, N. Love-day, C. Potvin, M. Flora, L. Magnusson, E. Gilleland, and J. Allen, “Extreme weather bench: A framework and benchmark for evaluation of high-impact weather,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.01126 , 2026. [57] C. Debus, M. Piraud, A. Streit, F. Theis, and M. G¨ otz, “Reporting electricity consumption is essential for sus-tainable ai,” Nature Machine Intelligence , vol. 5, no. 11, pp. 1176–1178, 2023. [58] S. Nath and T. Palmer, “Can ai models reliably forecast extreme weather events?” Nature , vol. 651, no. 8106, pp. 583–584, 2026. [59] D. Klocke, C. Frauen, J. F. Engels, D. Alexeev, R. Redler, R. Schnur, H. Haak, L. Kornblueh, N. Br¨ uggemann, F. Chegini et al. , “Computing the full earth system at 15 

1km resolution,” in Proceedings of the International Con-ference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis , 2025, pp. 125–136.